The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages
by Alfred Tarski

1

The Concept of True Sentence in Everyday or Colloquial Language

In this section, Tarski demonstrates some of the difficulties in trying to define a semantic notion of truth in natural
languages. Ideally, one would like a definition expressing the following:
a true sentence is one which says that the state of affairs is so and so, and that the state of affairs indeed is
so and so ([Tar35] 155)
In attempting to construct such a definition, however, it is difficult to avoid inconsistency. The liar’s paradox seems to
be an unavoidable problem, as shown through many examples (pages 157-162), leading Tarski believes it is impossible
to obtain a consistent definition of semantic truth in natural languages.
the attempt to construct a correct semantical definition of the expression ‘true sentence’ meets with very
real difficulties ([Tar35] 162).
What then about a structural definition of truth? i.e.
a true sentence is a sentence which possesses such and such structural properties or which can be obtained
from such and such structurally described expressions by means of such and such structural transformations
([Tar35] 163).
Tarski provides the following examples of such a structural definition.
1. every expression consisting of four parts of which the first is the word ‘if’, the third is the word ‘then’, and the
second and fourth are the same sentence, is a true sentence.
2. if a true sentence consists of four parts, of which the first is the word ‘if’, the second a true sentence, the third the
word ‘then’, then the fourth part is a true sentence.
Such an approach to defining truth, however, would require many (if not an infinite) number of rules. And as Tarski notes,
natural languages are not “finished”, but rather constantly changing (with the addition of new words and expressions,
the removal of existing ones, and chaning notions for existing ones). Also, the very structure of a natural language can
change, implying that any structural definition would also have to be dynamic. Thus,
The attempt to set up a structural definition of the term ‘true sentence’ – applicable to colloquial language
is confronted with insurperable difficulties ([Tar35] 164).
One of the most important features of natural languages is that they are universal in the sense that anything that
can be spoken of can be spoken of in a natural language (in contrast with formal languages which are quite limited in
what they can speak of). To maintain this universality when developing a semantic notion of truth for a given natural
language, one must allow any expression in that language mentioning ‘true sentence’, ‘name’, or ‘denote’. But as Tarski
notes, this seems to force any such language to be inconsistent.
Tarski concludes that a semantic or even structural notion of truth is completely impossible in natural languages and
abandons the attempt all-together, concerning himself only with formalized languages for the remainder of the paper.

1

2

Formalized Languages, especially the Language of the Calculus of Classes

Properties of all formal languages, as described in [Tar35] page 166. . .
1. A list or description is given in structural terms for all of the symbols with thich the expressions of the languages
are formed.
2. Among all possible expression which can be formed with these signs, those called sentences are distinguished by
means of purely structural properties.
3. A list, or structural description, is given of the sentences called axioms or primitive statements.
4. In special rules called rules of inference, certain operations of a structural kind are embodied which permit the
transformation of sentences into other sentences, called consequences. In particular, the consequences of the axioms
are called provable or asserted sentences.
Unlike natural languages, formal languages are not universal, specifcially in that they do no posses (directly) terms
denoting symbols or expressions of the same (or other) language. Thus, we must carefully distinguish between the
languages used. . .
• when speaking in a given language (called the language or the object language), and
• when speaking about a given language (called the metalanguage).
Similarly, we must carefully distinguish between the theory that is the object of investigation (called the theory) and the
theory in which the investigation is being carried out (called the metatheory). It is possible to give a method by which
a correct definition of truth can be constructed for any formal language ([Tar35] 168).1 Describing such a method is
difficult, and Tarski chooses instead to construct a definition of truth for a specifc formal language, namely, the language
of the calculus of classes.
Tarski then begins a meticulous construction of both the language and the metalanguage. Oddly (and at least I
think so), Tarski chooses to use letters for the operations in the object language (in Polish notation no less) and symbols
for the metalanguage (in normal infix notation).
Symbol
N
A
Π
I

Meaning
negation
disjunction
universal quantification
inclusion

The real focus of this section is the development of the metalanguage for the calculus of classes and the metatheory,
called the metacalculus of classes. The tedious construction is not noted here, but one key aspect of the metalanguage
is the following.
The fact that the metalanguage contains both an individual name and a translation of every expression (and
in particular of every sentence) of the language studied will play a decisive part in the construction of the
definition of truth. . . ([Tar35] 172).
Some Key Definitions. . .
Let S be the class of all well-formed sentences in the language, and Cn(X) be the class of all consequences of the class
of sentences X.
Definition 17 (Provable Sentence / Theorem). x is a provable (accepted) sentence or a theorem – in symbols
x ∈ P r – if and only if x is a consequence of the set of all axioms.
Definition 18 (Deductive System). X is a deductive system if and only if
Cn(X) ⊆ X ⊆ S
1 Is

this really what he means? If so, has anyone done this?

2

Definition 19 (Consistency). X is a consistent class of sentences if and only if X ⊆ S and if, for every sentence x,
either x 6∈ Cn(X) or ¬x 6∈ Cn(X).2
Definition 20 (Completeness). X is a complete class of sentences if and only if X ⊆ S and if, for every sentence
x, either x ∈ Cn(X) or ¬x ∈ Cn(X).
Definition 21 (Equivalence). The sentences x and y are equivalent with respect to the class X of sentences if and
only if x ∈ X, y ∈ S, X ⊆ S and both ¬x∨y ∈ Cn(X) and ¬y ∨x ∈ Cn(X) (which is the same as saying x → y ∈ Cn(X)
and y → x ∈ Cn(X)).

3

The Concept of True Sentence in the Language of the Calculus of
Classes

In this section, Tarski constructs a semantic definition of ‘true sentence’ for the calculus of classes.

4

The Concept of True Sentence in the Languages of Finite Order

still working.

5

The Concept of True Sentence in the Languages of Infinite Order

still working.

6

Summary

still working.

7

Postscript

still working.

References
[Tar35] Alfred Tarski, ‘The concept of truth in formalized languages’, Logic, Semantics and Metamathematics, Oxford
University Press, Oxford (1956), 1935, JH Woodger (trans.); First published as ‘Der Wahrheitsbegriff in Den
Formaliserten Sprachen’, Studia Philosophica I (1935).

2 I’ve

never seen consistency phrased this way. . . just curious.

3

