Systematically Misleading Expressions
Author(s): G. Ryle
Source: Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, New Series, Vol. 32 (1931 - 1932), pp. 139-170
Published by: Blackwell Publishing on behalf of The Aristotelian Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4544203
Accessed: 01/03/2010 22:26
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aristotelian.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

The Aristotelian Society and Blackwell Publishing are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society.

http://www.jstor.org

Meeting of the Aristotelian Society at 55, Russell Square, London,
TV.C.1lon March21st, 1932,at 8 p.m.

VIII.-SYSTEMATICALLYMISLEADINGEXPRESSIONS.
By G.

RYLE.

PHILOSOPHICAL
arguments have always largely, if not entirely,

consisted in attempts to thrash out " what it means to say so
and so." It is observed that men in their ordinary discourse,
the discourse, that is, that they employ when they are not
philosophizing, use certain expressions, and philosophers fastell
on to certain more or less radical types or classes of such expressions and raise their question about all expressions of a certain
type and ask what they really mean.
Sometimes philosophers say that they are analysing or clarifying the " concepts " which are embodied in the " judgments "
of the plain man or of the scientist, historian, artist or who-not.
But this seems to be only a gaseous way of saying that they are
trying to discover what is meant by the general terms contained
in the sentences which they pronounce or write. For, as we shall
see, " x is a concept " and " y is a judgnient " are thenmselves
systematically misleading expressionis.
But the whole procedure is very odd. For, if the expressionis
under consideration are intelligently used, their employers miust
already know what they mean and do not need the aid or adnmoinition of philosophers before they can understand what they are
saying. And if their hearers understanld what they are being
told, they too are in no such perplexity that they need to have
this meaning philosophically " analvsed " or " clarified " for
themn. And, at least, the philosopher hiiiself miust know what
the expressions mean, since othervise he could not know what,it
was that he was analysing.
P.

140

G. RYLE.

Certainly it is often the case that expressions are not being
intelligently used and to that extent their authors are just
gabbling parrot-wise. But then it is obviously fruitless to ask
what the expressions really meain. For there is no reason to
suppose that they mean anything. It would niot be mere
gabbling if there was any such reason. And if the philosopher
cares to ask what these expressions wouldmean if a rational man
were using them, the only answer would be that they would mean
what they would then mean. UTnderstandingthem would be
eniough, and that could be done by any reasonable listener.
Philosophizing could not help him, and, in fact, the philosopher
himself would not be able to begin unless he simply understood
them in the ordinary way.
It seems, then, that if an expression can be understood, then
it is already known in that understanding what the expression
means. So there is no darkness present and no illumination
required or possible.
And if it is suggested that the nion-philosophicalauthor of ani
expression (be he plain man, scientist, preacher or artist) does
know but only knows dimly or foggily or confusedly what his
expression means, but that the philosopher at the end of his
explorationiknows clearly, distinctly and definitely what it miieanis,
a two-fold answer seems inievitable. First, that if a speaker onlY
knows confusedly what his expression means, then he is in that
respect and to that extent just gabbling. And it is Inotthe rolenor the achievement-of the philosopher to provide a medicine
against that form of flux. An(d next, the philosopher is inot
exe ojfico concernied with ravings and ramblings: he studies
expressionlsfor what they meaniwhen intelligently and intelligibly
employed, and Inot as noises emitted by this idiot or that parrot.
Certainly expressionis do occur for which better substitutes
could be founid anid should be or should have beeni employed.
(1) All expression may be a breach of, e.g., English or Latin

141

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

grammar. (2) A word may be a foreign word, or a rare word or
a technical or trade term for which there exists a familiar
synonym. (3) A phrase or sentence may be clumsy or unfamiliar
in its structure. (4) A word or phrase may be equivocal and so
be an instrument of possible puns. (5) A word or phrase may
be ill-chosen as being general where it should be specific, or allusive where the allusion is not known or not obvious. (6) Or a
word may be a malapropism or a misnomer. But the search for
paraphrases which shall be more swiftly intelligible to a given
audience or more idiomatic or stylish or more grammatically or
etymologically correct is merely applied lexicography or philology
-it is not philosophy.
We ought then to face the question: Is there such a thing as
analyzing or clarifying the meaning of the expressions which
people use, except in the sense of substituting philologically
better expressions for philologically worse ones ? (We might
have put the problem in the more misleading terminology of
" concepts" and asked: How can philosophizing so operate
by analysis and clarification, upon the concepts used by the plain
man, the scientist or the artist, that after this operation the
concepts are illumined where before they were dark ? The saie
difficulties arise. For there cain be nio such thing as a confused
concept, since either a imianis conceiviing, .e., kinowingthe nature
of his subject-miatter,or he is faililg to do so. If he is succeedinig,
no clarification is required or possible ; anid if he is failinig, he
must find out more or think miloreabout the subject-iiatter, the
apprehension of the nature of which we call his " coilcept." But
this will not be philosophizing about the concept, but exploring
further the nature of the thing, anldso will be economics, perhaps,
or astroniomny
or history. But as I thinlkthat it cail be showinthat
it is not true in any niaturalsense that " there are concepts," I
shall adhere to the other method of stating the problem.)
R2

142

G. RYLE.

The object of this paper is not to, show what philosophy in
general is investigating, but to show that there remains an
important sense in which philosophers can and must discover and
state what is reallymeant by expressions of this or that radicaltype,
and inoniethe less that these discoveries do nlotin the least imply
that the naive users of such expressions are in any doubt or
confusion about what their expressions mean or in any way need
the results of the philosophical analysis for them to continue to
use intelligently their ordinary modes of expression or to use them
so that they are intelligible to others.
The gist of what I want to establish is this. There are manly
expressions* which occur in non-philosophical discourse which,
though they are perfectly clearly understood by those who use
them and those who hear or read them, are nevertheless couched
in grammatical or syntactical forms which are in a demonstrable
way iniproper to the states of affairs which they record (or the
alleged states of affairs which they profess to record). Such
expressions can be reformulated and for philosophy but not for
non-philosophical discourse must be reformulatedinto expressions
I use i"expression" to cover single words,phrasesand sentences.
By "statement"I meana sentencein the indicative. Whena statement
is true, I say it "records" a fact or state of affairs. False statements
do not record. To knowthat a statementis true is to knowthat something is the case and that the statementrecordsit. When I barely
understanda statementI do not know that it recordsa fact, nor need I
knowthe fact that it records,if it recordsone. But I knowwhatstate
*

of affairs wv-oidd
obtain, if the statement recorded a state of affairs.
Every significant statement is a qtuasi-reeord,for it has both the
requisite structure and constituents to be a record. But knowing these,
we don't yet know that it is a record of a fact. False statements are
pseudo-records and are no more records than pseudo-antiquities are
antiquities. So the question, What do false statements state ? is
neaningless if " state " means " record." If it means, What woulktthey
record if they recorded something being the case ? the question contains
its own a.nswer.

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

143

of which the syntactical form is proper to the facts recorded (or
the alleged facts alleged to be recorded).
When an expression is of such a syntactical form that it is
improper to the fact recorded, it is systematically misleading in
that it natuirally suggests to some people-though not to
" ordinary " people-that the state of affairs recorded is quite a
different sort of sta-te of affairs from that which it in fact is.

I shall try to show what I am driving at by examples. I
shall begin by considering a whole class of expressions of one
type which occur and occur perfectly satisfactorily in ordinary
discourse, but which are, I argue, systematicallymisleading, that
is to say, that they are couched in a syntactical form improper
to the facts recorded and proper to facts of quite another logical
form than the facts recorded. (For simplicity's sake, I shall
speak as if all the statements adduced as examples are true.
For false statements are not formally different from true ones.
Otherwise grammarians could become omniscient. And when
I call a statement "systematically misleading " I shall not mean
that it is false, and certainly not that it is senseless. By
" systematically " I mean that all expressions of that grammatical form would be misleading in the same way and for the
same reason.)

I.-Quasi-ontologicalstatemients.
Since Kant, we have, most of us, paid lip service to the doctrine
that " existence is not a quality " and so we have rejected the
pseudo-implication of the ontological argument; " God is perfect,
being perfect entails being existent, .'. God exists." For if
existence is not a quality, it is not the sort of thing that can be
entailed by a quality.
But until fairly recently it was not noticed that if in "'God
exists "exists " is not a predicate (save in grammar), then in the

144

G. RYLE.

same statement " God " cannot be (save in grammar) the subject
of predication. The realization of this came from examining
negative existential propositions like " Satan does not exist " or
" unicorns are non-existent." If there is no Satan, then the
statement " Satan does not exist " cannot be about Satan in
the way in which "I am sleepy " is about me. Despite appearances the word " Satan " caimot be signifying a subject of
attributes.
Philosophers have toyed with theories wlhich would enable
them to continue to say that " Satani does not exist " is noile the
less still somehow about Satan, and that " exists " still signifies
some sort of attribute or character, although not a quality.
So some argued that the statement was about something
(lescribed as " the idea of Satan," others that it was about a
suibsistent but noni-actualentity called " Satan." Both theories
in effect try to show that something may be (whether as beinig
" inerely mental " or as being in " the realm of subsistents "), but
not be in existence. But as we can say " round squares do not
exist," and " real nonentities do not exist," this sort of interpretation of negative existentials is bound to fill either the
realm of subsistents or the realm of ideas with walking selfconitradictions. So the theories had to be dropped and a new
analysis of existential propositions had to begin.
Suppose I assert of (apparently) the general subject " carnivorous cows " that they " do not exist," and my assertion is true, I
cannot really be talking about carnivorous cows, for there are
none. So it follows that the expression " carnivorous cows " is
niotreally being used, though the grammatical appearances are to
the contrary, to denote the thing or things of which the predicate
is being asserted. And in the same way as the verb " exists "
is not signifying the character asserted, although grammatically
it looks as if it was, the real predicate must be looked for elsewhere.

SYSTE-MATICALLY

MISLEADING

EXPRESSIONS.

145

So the clue of the grammar has to be rejected and the analysis
has been suggested that "carnivorous cows do not exist " means
what is meant by " no cows are carnivorous " or " no carnivorous
beasts are cows." But a further improvement seems to be
required.
"Unicorns do not exist " seems to mean what is meant by
"ilothing is both a quadruped and herbivorous and the wearer
of one horn " (or whatever the marks of being an uinicornare).
And this does not seem to imply that there are some quadrupeds
or herbivorous animals.
So " carnivorous cows do not exist " ought to be rendered
"nothing is both a cow and carnivorous," which does not as it
stands imply that anything is either.
Take now an apparently singular subject as in " God exists"
or " Satan does not exist." If the former analysis was right.
then here too " God " and " Satan " are in fact, despite grammatical appearance, predicative expressions. That is to say,
they are that element in the assertion that something has or
lacks a specified character or set of characters, which signifies
the character or set of characters by which the subject is being
asserted to be characterized. " God exists " must mean what
is meant by " Something, and one thing only. is omniscient, oinnipotent anidinfinitely good " (or whatever else are the characters
summed in the compound character of being a god aind the
only god). And " Satan does not exist " must mean what
is meant by " nothing is both devilish and aloine in being
devilish," or perhaps "nothing is both devilish and called
'Satan,' or even " ' Satan ' is not the proper name of
anything." To put it roughly, " x exists " and " x does not
exist " do not assert or deny that a given subject of attributes x has the attribute of existing, but assert or deny the
attribute of being x-ish or being an x of something not named
in the statement,

146

G. RYLE.

Now I can show my hand. I say that expressions such as
" carnivorous cows do not exist " are systematically misleading
and that the expressions by which we paraphrased them are not
or are not in the same way or to the same extent systematically
misleading. But they are not false, nor are they senseless.
They are true, and they really do mean what their less systematically nmisleadingparaphrases mean. Nor (save in a special class
of cases) is the non-philosophical author of such expressions
ignorant or doubtful of the nature of the state of affairs which
his expression records. He is not a whit misled. There is a
trap, however, in the form of his expression, but a trap which
only threatens the man who has begun to generalize about sorts
or types of states of affairs and assumes that every statement
gives in its syntax a clue to the logical formiof the fact that it
records. I refer here not merely nor even primarily to the
philosopher, but to any man who embarks on abstraction.
But before developing this theme I wanit to generalize the
results of our examination of what we must now describe as
"so-called existential statements." It is the more necessary
that, while most philosophers are now forewarned by Kant
against the systematic misleadingness of " God exists," few of
themnhave observed that the same taint infects a wlholehost of
other expressions.
If " God exists " means what we have said it meanis, then
patently " God is an existent," " God is an entity," " God has
being," or " existence " require the same analysis. So " . . . is
an existent," " . . . is an entity" are only bogus predicates,
and that of which (in grammar) they are asserte(dare only bogus
subjects.
And the same will be true of all the items in the following pair
of lists.

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

147

Mr. Pickwickis a nonentity.
is unreal or an unreality, or an
appearance.
is a bogus or sham entity.
is a genuine entity.
is not a substance.
is a substance.
is an actual object or entity. is an unreal object or entity.
is not objective or is subjective.
is objective.
is a fiction or figment.
is a concrete reality.
is an object.
is an imaginary object.
is not.
is.
is a mere idea.
is an abstraction.
is a logical construction.
None of these statements is really about Mr. Pickwick. For if
they are true, there is no such person for them to be about. Nor
is any of them about Mr. Baldwin. For if they were false, there
would be no one for them to be about. Nor in any of them is the
grammatical predicate that element in the statement which
signifies the character that is being asserted to be characterizing
or not to be characterizing something.
I formulate the conclusion in this rather clumsy way. There
is a class of statements of which the grammatical predicate
appears to signify not the having of a specified character but the
having (or not having) of a specified status. But in all such
statements the appearance is a purely grammatical one, and what
the statements really record can be stated in statements embodying no such quasi-ontological predicates.
And, again, in all such quasi-ontological statements the
grammatical subject-word or phrase appears to denote or refer
to something as that of which the quasi-ontological predicate is
being predicated; but in fact the apparent subject term is a
concealed predicative expression, and what is really recorded in
Mr. Baldwinis a being.
is real, or a reality.

148

G. RYLE.

such statements can be re-stated in statements no part of which
even appears to refer to any such subject.
In a word, all quasi-ontological statements are systematically
misleading. (If I am right in this, theni the conclusion follows,
which I accept, that those metaphysical philosophers are the
greatest sinners, who. as if they were saying something of importance, make " Reality " or " Being " the suibjectof their propositions, or "real " the predicate. For at best what they say is
systematically misleading, which is the one thing which a
philosopher's propositions have no right to be and at worst
it is meaningless.)
I must give warning ataini, that the naYveemiployer of suelh
quasi-ontological expressionis is not necessarily and not even
probably misled. He has said what he wanted to say, and anyone
who knew English would understand what he was saying.
Moreover, I would add, in the cases that I have listed, the
statements are not merely significant but true. Each of them
records a real state of affairs. Nor need they mislead the
philosopher. We, for instance, I hope are not misled. But the
point is that anyone, the philosopher included, who abstracts
and generalizes and so tries to consider what different facts of
the same type (i.e., facts of the same type about different things)
have in common, is compelled to use the common grammatical
form of the statements of those facts as handles with which to
grasp the common logical form of the facts themselves. For
(what we shall see later) as the way in which a fact oughtto be
recorded in expressions would be a clue to the form of that
fact, we jump to the assumption that the way in which a fact is
recorded is such a clue. And very often the clue is misleading
and suggests that the fact is of a different form from what really
is its form. " Satan is not a reality " from its grammatical form
looks as if it recorded the same sort of fact as " Capone is not a
philosopher," and so was just as much denying a character of a

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

149

somebody called " Satan " as the latter does deny a character
of a somebody called " Capone." But it turns out that the
suggestion is a fraud; for the fact recorded wouild have been
properly or less improperly recorded in the statement " ' Satan'
is not a proper nanme" or " No one is called ' Satan ' " or " No
one is both called ' Satan' and is infinitely malevolent. etc.." or
perhaps " Some people believe that someone is both called
' Satan ' and infinitely malevolent, but their belief is false." And
none of these statements even pretend to be " about Satan."
Instead, they are and are patently about the noise " Satan " or
else about people who misuse it.
In the same way, while it is significant, true and directly
intelligible to say " Mr. Pickwick is a fiction," it is a systematically misleading expression (i.e., an expression misleading in
virtue of a formal property which it does or might share with
other expressions) ; for it does not really record, as it appears to
record, a fact of the same sort as is recorded in " Mr. Baldwin is a
statesman." The world does not contain fictions in the way in
which it contains statesmen. There is no subject of attributes
of which we can say " thereis a fiction." What we can do is to
say of Dickens " there is a story-teller," or of Pickwick Papers
" thereis a pack of lies "; or of a sentence in that novel, which
contains the pseudo-name " Mr. Pickwick " " there is a fable."
And when we say things of this sort we are recording just what
we recorded when we said " Mr. Pickwick is a fiction," only our
new expressions do not suggest what our old one did that some
subject of attributes has the two attributes of being called
" Mr. Pickwick" and of being a fiction, but instead that some
subject of attributes has the attributes of being called Dickens
and being a coiner of false propositions and pseudo-propernames,
or, on the other analysis, of being a book or a sentence which
could only be true or false if someone was called " Mr. Pickwick."
The proposition " Mr. Pickwick is a fiction " is really, despite its

150

G. RYLE.

primafacies, about Dickens or else about Pickwick Papers. But
the fact that it is so is concealed and not exhibited by the form
of the expression in which it is said.
It must be noted that the sense in which such quasi-ontological
statements are misleading is not that they are false and not even
that any word in them is equivocal or vague, but only that they
are formally improper to the facts of the logical form which they
are employed to record anid proper to facts of quite another
logical form. What the implications are of these notions of
formal propriety or formal impropriety we shall see later on.
I 1.--Statemerns seeingtly abouttUniversals, or quasi-Platonic
statements.
We often and with great convenience use expressions such as
"Unpunctuality is reprehensible " and " Virtue is its own
reward." And at first sight these seem to be on all fours with
" Jones merits reproof " and " Smith has given himself the
prize." So philosophers, taking it that what is meant by such
statements as the former is precisely analogous to what is meant
by such statements as the latter, have accepted the consequence
that the world contains at least two sorts of objects, namely,
particular like Jones and Smith, and " universals " like Unpunctuality and Virtue.
But absurdities soon crop up. It is obviously silly to speak
of an universal meriting reproof. You can no more praise
or blame an " universal " then you can make holes in the
Equator.
Nor when we say " unpunctuality is reprehensible " do we
really suppose that unpunctuality ought to be ashamed of
itself.
What we do mean is what is also meant but better expressed
by "Whoever is unpunctual deserves that other people should
reprove him for being unpunctual." For it is unpunctual men

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

151

and not unpunietuality who can and should be blamed, since they
are, what it is not, moral agents. Now in the new expression
" whoever is unpunctual merits reproof " the word " unpunctuality" has vanished in favour of the predicative expression
". . is unpunctual." So that while in the original expression
unpunctuality " seemed to denote the subject of which an
attribute was being asserted, it now turns out to signify the
having of an attribute. And we are really saying that anyone
who has that attribute, has the other.
Again, it is not literally true that Virtue is a recipient of
rewards. What is true is that ainyonewho is virtuous is benefited
thereby. Whoever is good, gains something by being good.
So the original statement was not " about Virtue" but about
gToodmen, and the grammatical subject-word " Virtue " meant
what is meant by " . . . is virtuous " and so was, what it pretended not to be, a predicative expression.
I need not amplify this much. It is not literally true that
"honesty compels me to state so and so," for " honesty " is not
the name of a coercive agency. What is true is more properly
put " because I am honest, or wish to be honest, I am bound to
state so and so." "Colour involves extension" means what is
nleant by " Whatever is coloured is extended ;" hope deferred
maketh the heart sick " means what is meant by " whoever for
a long time hopes for something without getting it becomes
sick at heart."
It is my ownl view that all statements which seem to be
"about universals " are analysable in the same way, and consequently that general terms are never really the names of subjects
of attributes. So " universals " are not objects in the way in
which Mt. Everest is one, and therefore the age-old question
what sort of objects they are is a bogus question. For general
nouns, adjectives, etc., are not proper names, so we cannot speak
of " the objects called ' equality,' ' justice,' and ' progress.'

152

G. RYLE.

Platonic and anti-Platonic assertions, such as that " equality
is, or is not, a real entity," are, accordingly, alike misleading,
and misleading in two ways at once; for they are both quasiontological statements and quasi-Platonic ones.
However. I do not wish to defend this general position here,
but only to show that in somite
cases statements which from their
g-Trammatical
form seem to be saying that " honesty does so and
"
"
so or equality is such and such," are really saying in a
formally improper way (though one which is readily understandable and idiomatically correct) " anything which is equal to x is
such and such "' or " whoever is honest, is so and so." These
statements state overtly what the others stated covertly that
something's having one attribute necessitates its having the
other.
Of course, the plain man who uses such quasi-Platonic expressiOlns is not making a philosophical mistake. He is not philosophizing at all. He is not misled by and does not even notice
the fraudulent pretence contained in such propositions that they
are " about Honesty" or "'about Progress." He knows what
he mieansand will, very likely, accept our more formally proper
restatement of what he means as a fair paraphrase, but he will
not have anly motive for desiring the more proper form of
expressioi, nor even any grounds for holding that it is more
proper. For he is not attending to the form of the fact in
abstractioinfrom the special subject matter that the fact is about.
So for him the best way of expressing something is the way
which is the most brief, the most elegant, or the most emphatic,
whereas those who, like philosophers, must generalize about the
sorts of statements that have to be made of sorts of facts about
sorts of topics, cannot help treating as clues to the logical structures for which they are looking the gramnmaticalformrsof the
commnontypes of expressions in which these structures are
recor(led. Andilthese climestareofteni iimisleading.

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

153

III.-Descriptive expressionsand quasi-descriptions.
We all constantly use expressions of the form " the so and so"
as "the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford University." Very often
we refer by means of such expressions to some one uniquely
described individual. The phrases " the present Vice-Chancellor
of Oxford University " and " the highest mountain in the
world " have such a reference in such propositions as " the
present Vice-Chancellor of Oxford University is a tall man"
and " I have not seen the highest niountain in the world."
There is nothing intrinsically misleading in the use of " the "phrases as unique descriptions, though there is a sense in which
they are highly condensed or abbreviated. And philosophers
can and do make mistakes in the accounts they give of what
such descriptive phrases mean, What are misleading are, as
we shall see, " the "-phrases which behave grammatically as if
they were unique descriptions referring to individuals, when
in fact they are not referential phrases at all. But this class
of systematically misleading expressions cannot be examined
until we have considered howgeniuineunique descriptionsdo refer.
A descriptive phrase is not a proper name, and the way in
whlich the subject of attributes which it denotes is denoted by
it is not in that subject's being called " the so and so," but in its
possessing and being ipso facto the sole possessor of the idiosyncratic attribute which is what the descriptive phrase signifies.
If Tommy is the eldest son of Jones, then " the eldest son of
Jones" denotes Tommy, not because someone or other calls
him " the eldest son of Jones," but because he is and no one else
can be both a son of Jones and older than all the other sons of
Jones. The descriptive phrase, that is, is not a proper name
but a predicative expression signifying the joint characters of
being a son of Jones and older than the other sons of Jones. And
i-t refers to Tommy only in the sense that Tommy and Tommy
alone has those characters.

154

G. RYLE.

The phrase does not in any sense mneanTommy. Such a
view would be, as we shall see, nonsensical. It means what is
meant by the predicative expression, ". . . is both a son of
Jones and older than his other sons," and so it is itself only a
predicative expression. By a ' predicative expressioi "' 1
mean that fragment of a statement in virtue of which the having
of a certain character or characters is expressed. And the
having a certain character is not a subject of attributes but,
so to speak, the tail end of the facts that some subject of attributes
has it and some others lack it. By itself it neither names the
subject which has the characters nor records the fact that any
subject has it. It cannot indeed occur by itself, but only as
an element, namely, a predicative element in a full statement.
So the full statement " the eldest son of Jones was married
to-day " means what is meant by " someone (namely, Tommy)
(1) is a son of Jones, (2) is older than the other sons of
Jones [this could be unpacked further] and (3) was married
to-day.
The whole statement could not be true unless the three or
more component statements were true. But that there is someone of whom both (1) and (2) are true is not guaranteed by
their being stated. (No statement can guarantee its own truth.)
Consequently the characterizing expression " . . . is the eldest
son of Jones " does not mean Tommy either in the sense of being
his proper name or in the sense of being an expression the understanding of which involves the knowledge that Tommy has
this idiosyncratic character. It only refers to Tommy in the
sense that well-informed listeners will know already, that
Tommy and Tommy only has in fact this idiosyncratic character.
But this knowledge is not part of what must be known in order
to understand the statement, " Jones' eldest son was married
to-day." For we could know what it meant without knowing
that Tommy was that eldest son or was married to-day. All

155

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

we must know is that someone or other must be so characterized
for the whole statement to be true.
For understanding a statement or apprehending what a
statement means is not knowing that this statement records
this fact, but knowing what would be the case if the statement
werea record of fact.
There is no understanding or apprehending the meaning of
an isolated proper name or of an isolated unique description.
For either we know that someone in particular is called by that
name by certain persons or else has the idiosyncratic characters
signified by the descriptive phrase, which require that we are
acquainted both with the name or description and with the
person named or described. Or we do not know these things,
in which case we don't know that the quasi-name is a name at
all or that the quasi-unique description describes anyone. But
we can understand statements in which quasi-names or quasiunique descriptions occur; for we can know what would be the
case if someone were so called or so describable, and also had the
other characters predicated in the predicates of the statements,
We see then that descriptive phrases are condensed predicative
expressions and so that their function is to be that element or
(more often) one of those elements in statements (which as a
whole record that something has a certain character or characters) in which the having of this or that character is expressed,
And this can easily be seen by another approach.
Take any " the "-phrase which is naturally used referentially
as the grammatical subject of a sentence, as " The ViceChancellor of Oxford University " in " The Vice-Chancellor of
Oxford University is busy." We can now take the descriptive
phrase, lock, stock and barrel, and use it non-referentially as
the grammatical predicate in a series of statements and expressions, "Who is the present Vice-Chancellor of Oxford
University ' "Mr. So-and-So is the present Vice-Chancellor
s

156

G. RYLE.

of Oxford University," " Georges Carpentier is not the present
Vice-Chancellor of Oxford University," " Mr. Such-and-Such is
either the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford University or Senior
Proctor," " Whoever is Vice-Chancellor of Oxford University is
overworked," etc. It is clear anyhow in the cases of the negative,
hypothetical and disjunctive statements containing this common
predicative expression that it is not implied or even suggested
that anyone does hold the office of Vice-Chancellor. So the
" the "-phrase is here quite non-referential, and does not even
pretend to denote someone. It signifies an idiosyncratic character, but does not involve that anyone has it. This leads us
back to our original conclusion that a descriptive phrase does not
in any sense mean this person or that thing; or, to put it in another
way, that we can understand a statement containing a descriptive
phrase and still not know of this subject of attributes or of that
one that the description fits it. (Indeed, we hardly need to
argue the position. For no one with a respect for sense would
dream of pointing to someone or something and saying " that
is the meaning of such and such an expression " or " the meaning
of yonder phrase is suffering from influenza." " Socrates is a
meaning " is a nonsensical sentence. The wh'ole pother about
denoting seems to arise from the supposition that we could
significantly describe an object as " the meaning of the expression
Ix " or ' what the expression 'x ' means." Certainly a
*descriptivephrase can be said to refer to or fit this man or that
,mountain, and this man or that mountain can be described as
that to which the expression " x " refers. But this is only to
;say that this man or that mountain has and is alone in having
the characters the having of which is expressed in the predicative
,sentence-fragment " . . . is the so-and-so.")
All this is only leading up to another class of systematically
misleading expressions. But the "the "-phrases which we
.have been studying, whether occurring as grammatical subjects

157

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

or as predicates in statements, were not formally fraudulent.
There was nothing in the grammatical form of the sentences
adduced to suggest that the facts recorded were of a different
logical form from that which they really had.
The previous argument was intended to be critical of certain
actual or possible philosophical errors, but they were errors
about descriptive expressions and not errors due to a trickiness
in descriptive expressions as such. Roughly, the errors that I
have been trying to dispel are the views (1) that descriptive
phrases are proper names and (2) that the thing which a description describes is what the description means. I want now to
come to my long-delayed muttons and discuss a further class
of systematically misleading expressions.
Systematically misleading quasi-referential" the "-phrases.
1. There frequently occur in ordinary discourse expressions
which, though " the "-phrases, are not unique descriptions at
all, although from their grammatical form they look as if they
are. The man who does not go in for abstraction and generalization uses them without peril or perplexity and knows quite well
what he means by the sentences containing them. But the
philosopher has to re-state them in a different and formally
more proper arrangement of words if he is not to be trapped.
When a descriptive phrase is used as the grammatical subject
of a sentence in a formally non-misleading way, as in "the
King went shooting to-day," we know that if the statement
as a whole is true (or even false) then there must be in the world
someone in particular to whom the description "the King "
refers or applies. And we could significantly ask "Who is the
King ? " and " Are the father of the Prince of Wales and the King
one and the same person ? "
But we shall see that there are in common use quasi-descriptive phrases of the form " the so-and-so," in the cases of which
s 2

158

G. RYLE.

there is in the world no one and nothing that could be described
as that to'which the phrase refers or applies, and thus that there
is nothing and nobody about which or whom we could even ask
" Is it the so-and-so?" or " Are he and the so-and-so one and
the same person ? "
It can happen in several ways. Take first the statement,
which is true and clearly intelligible, " Poincare is not the King
of France." This at first sight looks formally analogous to
" Tommy Jones is not (i.e., is not identical with) the King of
England." But the difference soon shows itself. For whereas
if the latter is true then its converse " the King of England is
not Tommy Jones " is true, it is neither true nor false to say
" The King of France is not Poincare." For there is no King
of France and the phrase " the King of France " does not fit
anybody-nor did the plain man who said " Poincare is not
the King of France " suppose the contrary. So "the King of
France " in this statement is not analogous to "the King of
England " in the others. It is not really being used referentially
or as a unique description of somebody at all.
We can now redraft the contrasted propositions in forms of
words which shall advertize the difference which the original
propositions concealed between the forms of the facts recorded.
"Tommy Jones is not the same person as the King of
England " means what is meant by (1) " Somebody and-of an
unspecified circle-one person only is called Tommy Jones;
(2) Somebody, and one person only has royal power in England;
and (3) No one both is called Tommy Jones and is King of
England." The original statement could not be true unless
(1) and (2) were true.
Take now " Poincare is not the King of France." This
means what is meant by (1) Someone is called " Poincare "
and (2) Poincare has not got the rank, being King of France.
And this does not imply that anyone has that rank.

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

159

Sometimes this twofold use, namely the referential and the
non-referential use of " the "-phrases troubles us in the mere
practice of ordinary discourse. " Smith is not the only man
who has ever climbed Mont Blanc " might easily be taken by
some people to mean what is meant by " One man and one
man only has climbed Mont Blanc, but Smith is not he," and
by others, " Smith has climbed Mont Blanc but at least one
other man has done so too." But I am not interested in the
occasional ambiguity 6f such expressions, but in the fact that
an expression of this sort which is really being used in the nonreferential way is apt to be construed as if it must be referentially
used, or as if any " the "-phrase was referentially used. Philosophers and others who have to abstract and generalize tend
to be misled by the verbal similarity of " the "-phrases of the one
sort with " the "-phrases of the other into " coining entities " in
order to be able to show to what a given " the "-phrase refers.
Let us first consider the phrase " the top of that tree " or
"the centre of that bush " as they occur in such statements as
"an owl is perched on the top of that tree," " my arrow flew
through the centre of the bush." These statements are quite
unambiguous and convey clearly and correctly what they are
intended to convey.
But as they are in syntax analogous to " a man is sitting
next to the Vice-Chancellor" and " my arrow flew through the
curtain," and as further an indefinite list could be drawn up of
different statements having in common the "the-phrases "
" the top of that tree " and " the centre of that bush," it is
hard for people who generalize to escape the temptation of
supposing or even believing that these " the "-phrases refer to
objects in the way in which " the Vice-Chancellor" and " the
curtain" refer to objects. And this is to suppose or believe
that the top of that tree is a genuine subject of attributes in
just the same way as the Vice-Chancelloris.

160

G. RYLE.

But (save in the case where the expression is being misused
for the expression "the topmost branch" or "<the topmost
leaf of the tree ") " the top of the tree " at once turns out not
to be referring to any object. There is nothing in the world
of which it is true (or even false) to say " that is the top of such
and such a tree." It does not, for instance, refer to a bit of the
tree, or it could be cut down and burned or put in a vase.
" The top of the tree " does not refer to anything, but it signifies
an attribute, namely, the having of a relative position, when it
occurs in statements of the form " x is at or near or above or
below the top of the tree." To put it crudely, it does not refer
to a thing but signifies a thing's being in a certain place, or else
signifies not a thing but the site or locus of a thing such as of the
bough or leaf which is higher than any of the other boughs or
leaves on the tree. Accordingly it makes sense to say that now
one bough and now another is at the top of the tree. But " at
the top of the tree " means no more than what is meant by
" higher than any other part of the tree," which latter phrase
no one could take for a referential phrase like " the present
Vice-Chancellor."
The place of a thing, or the whereabouts of a ihing is not
a thing but the tail end of the fact that something is there.
"Where the bee sucks, there suck I," but it is the clover flower
that is there which holds the honey and not the whereabouts of
the flower. All that this amounts to is that though we can use
quasi-descriptive phrases to enable us to state where something
is, that the thing is there is a relational character of the thing and
not itself a subject of characters.
I suspect that a lot of Cartesian and perhaps Newtonian
blunders about Space and Time originate from the systematically
misleading character of the " the "-phrases which we use to
date and locate things, such as " the region occupied by x,"
" the path followed by y," "the moment or date at which

SYSTEMATICALLY

MISLEADING

EXPRESSIONS.

161

z happened." It was not seen that these are but hamstrung
predicative expressions and are not and are not even ordinarily
taken to be referentially used descriptive expressions, any nlore
than " the King of France " in " Poincare is not the King of
France" is ordinarily treated as if it was a referentially used
"the "-phrase.
Take another case. "Jones hates the thought of going to
hospital," " the idea of having a holiday has just occurredto me.'"
These quasi-descriptive phrases suggest that there is one object
in the world which is what is referred to by the phrase " the
thought of going to hospital " and another which is what is
referred to by " the idea of having a holiday." And anyhow
partly through accepting the grammatical prima facies of such
expressions, philosophers have believed as devoutly in the exist-,
ence of " ideas,"

"

conceptions " and " thoughts " or " judg-

ments " as their predecessors did (from similar causes) in that of
substantial forms or as children do (from similar causes) in that
of the Equator, the sky and the North Pole.
But if we re-state them, the expressions turn out to be no
evidence whatsoever in favour of the Lockean demonology.
For " Jones hates the thought of going to hospital " only means
what is meant by " Jones feels distressed when he thinks of what
he will undergo if he goes to hospital." The phrase " the thought
of . . ." is transmuted

into

" whenever he thinks of . . .,'>

which does not even seem to contain a reference to any other
entity than Jones and, perhaps, the hospital. For it to be
true, the world must contain a Jones who is sometimes thinking
and sometimes, say, sleeping; but it need no more contain both
Jones and " the thought or idea of so and so " than it need
contain both someone called " Jones " and something called
" Sleep."
Similarly, the statement " the idea of taking a holiday has
just occurred to me " seems grammatically to be analogous ta

162

G. RYLE.

"that dog has just bitten me." And as, if the latter is true,
the world must contain both me and the dog, so it would seem,
if the former is true, the world must contain both me and the
idea of taking a holiday. But the appearance is a delusion.
For while I could not re-state my complaint against the dog in
any sentence not containing a descriptive phrase referring to it,
I can easily do so with the statement about " the idea of taking
a holiday," e.g., in the statement " I have just been thinking that
I might take a holiday."
A host of errors of the same sort has been generated in logic
itself and epistemology by the omission to analyse the quasidescriptive phrase " the meaning of the expression ' x ' " I
suspect that all the mistaken doctrines of concepts, ideas, terms,
judgments, objective propositions, contents, objectives and the
like derive from the same fallacy, namely, that there must be
somethingreferred to by such expressions as " the meaning of the
word (phrase or sentence) ' x '," on all fours with the policeman
who really is referredto by the descriptive phrase in " our village
policeman is fond of football." And the way out of the confusion is to see that some " the "-phrases are only similar in
grammar and not similar in function to referentially-used
descriptive phrases, e.g., in the case in point, " the meaning of
" x ' " is like " the King of France " in " Poincare is not the
King of France," a predicative expression used non-referentially.
And, of course, the ordinary man does not pretend to himself
or anyone else that when he makes statements containing such
expressions as " the meaning of ' x '," he is referring to a queer
new object: it does not cross his mind that his phrase might be
misconstrued as a referentially used descriptive phrase. So he
is not guilty of philosophical error or clumsiness. None the
less his form of words is systematically misleading. For an
important difference of logical form is disguised by the complete
similarity of grammatical form between " the village policeman

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

163

is reliable " and " the meaning of ' x ' is doubtful " or again
between " I have just met the village policeman " and " I have
just grasped the meaning of ' x'."
(Consequently, as there is no object describable as that
which is referred to by the expression " the meaning of ' x ',"
questions about the status of such objects are meaningless. It
is as pointless to discuss whether word-meanings(i.e., " concepts "
or " universals ") are subjective or objective, or whether sentencemeanings (i.e., "judgments " or " objectives ") are subjective
or objective, as it would be to discuss whether the Equator or
the sky is subjective or objective. For the questions themselves
are not about anything.)
All this does not of course in the least prevent us from using
intelligently and intelligibly sentences containing the expression
"the meaning of 'x'" where this can be re-drafted as " what
'x ' means." For here the " the "-phrase is being predicatively
used and not as an unique description. " The meaning of ' x '
is the same as the meaning of ' y ' "is equivalent to " ' x ' means
what 'y' means," and that can be understood without any
temptation to multiply entities.
But this argument is, after all, only about a very special
case of the systematic misleadingness of quasi-descriptions.
2. There is another class of uses of " the "-phrases which is
also liable to engender philosophical misconstructions, though
I am not sure that I can recall any good instances of actual
mistakes which have occurred from this source.
Suppose, I say, " the defeat of the Labour Party has surprised me," what I say could be correctly paraphrased by " the
fact that the Labour Party was defeated, was a surpriseto me " or
" the Labour Party has been defeated and I am surprised that
it has been defeated." Here the " the "-phrase does not refer
to a thing but is a condensed record of something's being the
case. And this is a common and handy idiom. We can always

164

G. RYLE.

say instead of " because A is B, therefore C is D" "the D-ness
of C is due to the B-ness of A." " The severity of the winter is
responsible for the high price of cabbages " means what is meant
by " Cabbages are expensive because the winter was severe."
But if I say " the defeat of the Labour Party occurred in
1931," my " the "-phrase is referentially used to describe an
event and not as a condensed record of a fact. For events have
dates, but facts do not. So the facts recorded in the grammatically similar statements " the defeat of the Labour Party
has surprisedme " and " the defeat of the Labour Party occurred
in 1931 " are in logical form quite different. And both sorts of
facts are formally quite different from this third fact which is
recorded in "the victory of the Labour Party would have
surprised me." For this neither refers to an event, nor records
the fact that the Labour Party was victorious, but says " if the
Labour Party had won, I should have been surprised." So here
the " the "-phrase is a protasis. And, once more, all these
three uses of " the "-phrases are different in their sort of significance from " the defeat of the Conservative Party at the next
election is probable," or " possible," or " impossible." For
these mean " the available relevant data are in favour of " or
" not incompatible with " or " incompatible with the Conservative Party being defeated at the next election."
So there are at least these four different types of facts which
can be and, in ordinary discourse, are conveniently and intelligibly
recorded in statemeiits containing grammatically indistinguishable " the "-phrases. But they can be restated in forms of
words which do exhibit in virtue of their special grammatical
forms the several logical structures of the different sorts of facts
recorded.
3. Lastly, I must just mention one further class of systematically misleading " the "-phrases. " The whale is not a fish but
a mammal " and " the true Englishman detests foul play "

SYSTEMATICALLY MISLEADING EXPRESSIONS.

165

record facts, we may take it. But they are not about this whale
or that Englishman, and they might be true even if there were
no whales or no true Englishmen. These are, probably, disguised hypothetical statements. But all I wish to point out is
that they are obviously disguicsed.
I have chosen these three main types of systematically
misleading expressions because all alike are misleading in a
certain direction. They all suggest the existence of new sorts
of objects or, to put it in another way, they are all temptations
to us to " multiply entities." In each of them, the quasiontological, the quasi-Platonic and the quasi-descriptive expressions an expression is misconstrued as a denoting expression
which in fact does not denote, but only looks grammatically
like expressions which are used to denote. Occam's prescription
was, therefore, in my view, " do not treat all expressions which
are grammatically like proper names or referentially used
" the "-phrases, as if they were therefore proper names or
referentially used " the "-phrases."
But there are other types of systematically misleading
expressions, of which I shall just mention a few that occur to
me.
"'Jones is an alleged murderer," or " a suspected murderer,"
"Smith is a possible or probable Lord Mayor," " Robinson is
an ostensible, or seeming or mock or sham or bogus hero,"
" Brown is a future or a past Member of Parliament," etc,
These suggest what they do not mean, that the subjects named
are of a special kind of murderer, or Lord Mayor, or hero, or
Member of Parliament. But being an alleged murderer does
not entail being a murderer, nor does being a likely Lord Mayor
entail being a Lord Mayor.
" Jones is popular " suggests that being popular is like being
wise, a quality; but in fact it is a relational character, and one

166

G. RYLE.

which does not directly characterize Jones, but the people who
are fond of Jones, and so " Jones is popular " means what is
meant by " Many people like Jones, and many more like him
than either dislike him or are indifferent to him," or something
of the sort.
But I have, I think, given enough instances to show in what
sense expressions may seem to mean something quite different
from what they are in fact used to mean; and therefore I have
shown in what sense some. expressions are systematically misleading.
So I am taking it as established (1) that what is expressed in
one expression can often be expressed in expressions of quite
different grammatical forms, and (2) that of two expressions,
each meaning what the other means, which are of different
grammatical forms, one is often more systematically misleading
than the other.
And this means that while a fact or state of affairs can be
recorded in an indefinite number of statements of widely differing
grammatical forms, it is stated better in some than in others.
The ideal, which may never be realized, is that it should be stated
in a completely non-misleading form of words.
Now, when we call one form of expression better than another,
we do not mean that it is more elegant or brief or familiar or
more swiftly intelligble to the ordinary listener, but that in virtue
of its grammatical form it exhibits, in a way in which the others
fail to exhibit, the logical form of the state of affairs or fact
that is being recorded. But this interest in the best way of
exhibiting the logical form of facts is not for every man, but
only for the philosopher.
I wish now to raise, but not to solve, some consequential
problems which arise.
1. Given that an expression of a certain grammatical form
is proper (or anyhow approximates to being proper) to facts of

SYSTEMATICALLY

MISLEADING

EXPRESSIONS.

167

a certain logical form and to those facts only, is this relation of
propriety of grammatical to logical form natural or conventional ?
I cannot myself credit what seems to be the doctrine of
Wittgenstein and the school of logical grammarians who owe
allegiance to him, that what makes an expression formally
proper to a fact is some real and non-conventional one-one
picturing relation between the composition of the expression
and that of the fact. For I do not see how, save in a small class
of specially-chosen cases, a fact or state of affairs can be deemed
like or even unlike in structure a sentence, gesture or diagram.
For a fact is not a collection-even an arranged collection-of
bits in the way in which a sentence is an arranged collection of
noises or a map an arranged collection of scratches. A fact is
not a thing and so is not even an arranged thing. Certainly a
map may be like a country or a railway system, and in a more
general, or looser, sense a sentence, as an ordered series of noises
might be a similar sort of series to a series of vehicles in a stream
of traffic or the series of days in the week.
But in Socrates being angry or in the fact that either Socrates
was wise or Plato was dishonest I can see no concatenation of
bits such that a concatenation of parts of speech could be held
to be of the same general architectural plan as it. But this
difficulty may be just denseness on my part.
On the other hand, it is not easy to accept what seems to be
the alternative that it is just by convention that a given grammatical form is specially dedicated to facts of a given logical
form. For, in fact, customary usage is perfectly tolerant of
systematically misleading expressions. And, moreover, it is
hard to explain how in the genesis of languages our presumably
non-philosophical forbears could have decided on or happened
on the dedication of a given grammatical form to facts of a given
logical form. For presumably the study of abstract logical

168

G. RYLE.

form is later than the entry into common use of syntactical
idioms.
It is, however, my present view that the propriety of grammatical to logical forms is more nearly conventional than natural:
though I do not suppose it to be the effect of whim or of deliberate
plan.
2. The next question is: How are we to discover in particular
cases whether an expression is systematically misleading or not ?
I suspect that the answer to this will be of this sort. We meet
with and understand and even believe a certain expression such
as " Mr. Pickwick is a fictitious person " and " the Equator
encircles the globe." And we know that if these expressions
are saying what they seem to be saying, certain other propositions
will follow. But it turns out that the naturally consequential
propositions " Mr. Pickwick was born in such and such a year "
and " the Equator is of such and such a thickness " are not
merely false but, on analysis, in contradiction with something in
that from which they seemed to be logical consequences. The
only solution is to see that being a fictitious person is not to be
a person of a certain sort, and that the sense in which the Equator
girdles the earth is not that of being any sort of a ring or ribbon
enveloping the earth. And this is to see that the original
propositions were not saying what they seemed on first analysis
to be saying. Paralogisms and antinomies are the evidence
that an expression is systematically misleading.
None the less, the systematically misleading expressions as
intended and as understood contain no contradictions. People
do not really talk philosophical nonsense-unless they are
philosophizing or, what is quite a different thing, unless they
are being sententious. What they do is to use expressions
which, from whatever cause-generally the desire for brevity and
simplicity of discourse-disguise instead of exhibiting the forms
of the facts recorded. And it is to reveal these forms that we

SYSTEMATICALLY

MISLEADING

EXPRESSIONS.

169

abstract and generalize. These processes of abstraction and
generalization occur before philosophical analysis begins. It
seems indeed that their results are the subject matter of
philosophy. Pre-philosophical abstract thinking is always misled
by systematically misleading expressions, and even philosophical
abstract thinking, the proper function of which is to cure this
disease, is actually one of its worst victims.
3. I do not know any way of classifying or giving an exhaustive list of the possible types of systematically misleading
expressions. I fancy that the number is in principle unlimited,
but that the number of prevalent and obsessing types is fairly
small.
4. I do not know any way of proving that an expression
contains no systematic misleadingness at all. The fact that
antinomies have not yet been shown to arise is no proof that
they never will arise. We can know that of two expressions
" x " and " y " which record the same fact, " x " is less misleading than "y"; but not that " x " cannot itself be improved
upon.
5. Philosophy must then involve the exercise of systematic
restatemnent. But this does not mean that it is a department of
philology or literary criticism.
Its restatement is not the substitution of one noun for another
or one verb for another. That is what lexicographers and translators excel in. Its restatements are transmutations of syntax,
and transmutations of syntax controlled not by desire for
elegance or stylistic correctness but by desire to exhibit the
forms of the facts into which philosophy is the enquiry.
I conclude, then, that there is, after all, a sense in which we
can properly enquire and even say " what it really means to say
so and so." For we can ask what is the real form of the fact
recorded when this is concealed or disguised and not duly

170

G. RYLE.

exhibited by the expression in question. And we can often
succeed in stating this fact in a new form of words which does
exhibit what the other failed to exhibit. And I am for the
present inclined to believe that this is what philosophical
analysis is, and that this is the sole and whole function of
philosophy. But I do not want to argue this point now.
But, as confession is good for the soul, I must admit that I
do not very much relish the conclusions towards which these
conclusions point. I would rather allot to philosophy a sublimer
task than the detection of the sources in linguistic idioms of
recurrent misconstructions and absurd theories. But that it is
at least this I cannot feel any serious doubt.
[In this paper I have deliberately refrained from describing
expressions as " incomplete symbols " or quasi-things as " logical
constructions." Partly I have abstained because I am fairly
ignorant of the doctrines in which these are technical terms,
though in so far as I do understand them, I think that I could
re-state them in words which I like better without modifying
the doctrines. But partly, also, I think that the terms themselves
are rather ill-chosen and are apt to cause unnecessary perplexities.
But I do think that I have been talking about what is talked
about by those who use these terms, when they use them.]

