A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

A DEFENCE OF COMMON
SENSE

In what follows I have merely tried to state, one by one, some of
the most important points in which my philosophical position
differs from positions which have been taken up by some other
philosophers. It may be that the points which I have had room to
mention are not really the most important, and possibly some of
them may be points as to which no philosopher has ever really
differed from me. But, to the best of my belief, each is a point as
to which many have really differed; although (in most cases, at all
events) each is also a point as to which many have agreed with
me.
I. The first point is a point which embraces a great many other
points. And it is one which I cannot state as clearly as I wish to
state it, except at some length. The method I am going to use for
stating it is this. I am going to begin by enunciating, under the
heading (1), a whole long list of propositions, which may seem, at
first sight, such obvious truisms as not to be worth stating: they
are, in fact, a set of propositions, every one of which (in my own
opinion) I know, with certainty, to be true. I shall, next, under the
heading (2), state a single proposition which makes an assertion
about a whole set of classes of propositions - each class being
defined, as the class consisting of all propositions which resemble
one of the propositions in (1) in a certain respect. (2), therefore, is
a proposition which could not be stated, until the list of
propositions in (1), or some similar list, had already been given.
(2) is itself a proposition which may seem such an
Originally published in Contemporary British Philosophy (second series), ed.
J.H. Muirhead (George Allen & Unwin, London: 1925), pp.192-233.

106

obvious truism as not to be worth stating: and it is also a
proposition which (in my own opinion) I know, with certainty, to
be true. But, nevertheless, it is, to the best of my belief, a
proposition with regard to which many philosophers have, for
different reasons, differed from me; even if they have not directly
denied (2) itself, they have held views incompatible with it. My first
point, then, may be said to be that (2), together with all its
implications, some of which I shall expressly mention, is true.
(1) I begin, then, with my list of truisms, every one of which (in
my own opinion) I know, with certainty, to be true. The
propositions to be included in this list are the following:
There exists at present a living human body, which is my
body. This body was born at a certain time in the past, and has
existed continuously ever since, though not without undergoing
changes; it was, for instance, much smaller when it was born, and
for some time afterwards, than it is now. Ever since it was born, it
has been either in contact with or not far from the surface
of the earth; and, at every moment since it was born, there
have also existed many other things, having shape and size
in three dimensions (in the same familiar sense in which it has),
from which it has been at various distances (in the familiar sense
in which it is now at a distance both from that mantelpiece and
from that bookcase, and at a greater distance from the
bookcase than it is from the mantelpiece); also there have (very
often, at all events) existed some other things of this kind with
which it was in contact (in the familiar sense in which it is now in
contact with the pen I am holding in my right hand and
with some of the clothes I am wearing). Among the things
which have, in this sense, formed part of its environment
(i.e., have been either in contact with it, or at some
distance from it, however great) there have, at every moment
since its birth, been large numbers of other living human bodies,
each of which has, like it, (a) at some time been born, (b)
continued to exist from some time after birth, (c) been, at every
moment of its life after birth, either in contact with or not far from
the surface of the earth; and many of these bodies have already
died and ceased to exist. But the earth had existed also for many
years before my body was born; and for many of these years, also,
large numbers of human bodies had, at every moment, been alive
upon it; and many of these bodies had died and ceased to exist
before it was
107

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

born. Finally (to come to a different class of propositions), I am a
human being, and I have, at different times since my body was
born, had many different experiences, of each of many different
kinds: e.g., I have often perceived both my own body and other
things which formed part of its environment, including other
human bodies; I have not only perceived things of this kind, but
have also observed facts about them, such as, for instance, the
fact which I am now observing, that that mantelpiece is at present
nearer to my body than that bookcase; I have been aware of
other facts, which I was not at the time observing, such as, for
instance, the fact, of which I am now aware, that my body
existed yesterday and was then also for some time nearer to that
mantelpiece than to that bookcase; I have had expectations with
regard to the future, and many beliefs of other kinds, both true
and false; I have thought of imaginary things and persons and
incidents, in the reality of which I did not believe; I have had
dreams; and I have had feelings of many different kinds. And,
just as my body has been the body of a human being, namely
myself, who has, during his lifetime, had many experiences of
each of these (and other) different kinds; so, in the case of very
many of the other human bodies which have lived upon the earth,
each has been the body of a different human being, who has,
during the lifetime of that body, had many different experiences
of each of these (and other) different kinds.
(2) I now come to the single truism which, as will be seen,
could not be stated except by reference to the whole list of
truisms, just given in (1). This truism also (in my own opinion) I
know, with certainty, to be true; and it is as follows:
In the case of very many (I do not say all) of the human beings
belonging to the class (which includes myself) defined in the
following way, i.e., as human beings who have had human
bodies, that were born and lived for some time upon the earth,
and who have, during the lifetime of those bodies, had many
different experiences of each of the kinds mentioned in (1), it is
true that each has frequently, during the life of his body,
known, with regard to himself or his body, and with regard to
some time earlier than any of the times at which I wrote down the
propositions in (1), a proposition corresponding to each of the
propositions in (1), in the sense that it asserts with regard to
himself or his body and the earlier time in question (namely, in
108

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

each case, the time at which he knew it), just what the corresponding proposition in (1) asserts with regard to me or my body
and the time at which I wrote that proposition down.
In other words what (2) asserts is only (what seems an obvious
enough truism) that each of us (meaning by 'us', very many
human beings of the class defined) has frequently known, with
regard to himself or his body and the time at which he knew it,
everything which, in writing down my list of propositions in (1), I
was claiming to know about myself or my body and the time at
which I wrote that proposition down, i.e., just as I knew (when I
wrote it down) 'There exists at present a living human body which
is my body', so each of us has frequently known with regard to
himself and some other time the different but corresponding
proposition, which he could then have properly expressed by,
'There exists at present a human body which is my body'; just as I
know 'Many human bodies other than mine have before now
lived on the earth', so each of us has frequently known the
different but corresponding proposition 'Many human bodies other
than mine have before now lived on the earth'; just as I know
'Many human beings other than myself have before now
perceived, and dreamed, and felt', so each of us has frequently
known the different but corresponding proposition 'Many human
beings other than myself have before now perceived, and
dreamed, and felt'; and so on, in the case of each of the
propositions enumerated in (1).
I hope there is no difficulty in understanding, so far, what this
proposition (2) asserts. I have tried to make dear by examples
what I mean by 'propositions corresponding to each of the propositions in (1)'. And what (2) asserts is merely that each of us has
frequently known to be true a proposition corresponding (in that
sense) to each of the propositions in (1) - a different corresponding proposition, of course, at each of the times at which he knew
such a proposition to be true.
But there remain two points, which, in view of the way in
which some philosophers have used the English language, ought, I
think, to be expressly mentioned, if I am to make quite clear
exactly how much I am asserting in asserting (2).
The first point is this. Some philosophers seem to have
thought it legitimate to use the word 'true' in such a sense that a
proposition which is partially false may nevertheless also be true;
and some of these, therefore, would perhaps say that
109

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

propositions like those enumerated in (1) are, in their view, true,
when all the time they believe that every such proposition is
partially false. I wish, therefore, to make it quite plain that I am
not using 'true' in any such sense. I am using it in such a sense
(and I think this is the ordinary usage) that if a proposition is
partially false, it follows that it is not true, though, of course, it
may be partially true. I am maintaining, in short, that all the
propositions in (1), and also many propositions corresponding to
each of these, are wholly true; I am asserting this in asserting (2).
And hence any philosopher, who does in fact believe, with regard
to any or all of these classes of propositions, that every
proposition of the class in question is partially false, is, in fact,
disagreeing with me and holding a view incompatible with (2),
even though he may think himself justified in saying that he
believes some propositions belonging to all of these classes to be
'true'.
And the second point is this. Some philosophers seem to have
thought it legitimate to use such expressions as, e.g. 'The earth has
existed for many years past, as if they expressed something which
they really believed, when in fact they believe that every
proposition, which such an expression would ordinarily be
understood to express, is, at least partially, false; and all they
really believe is that there is some other set of propositions,
related in a certain way to those which such expressions do
actually express, which, unlike these, really are true. That is to
say, they use the expression 'The earth has existed for many years
past' to express, not what it would ordinarily be understood to
express, but the proposition that some proposition, related to this
in a certain way, is true; when all the time they believe that the
proposition, which this expression would ordinarily be understood
to express, is, at least partially, false. I wish, therefore, to make it
quite plain that I was not using the expressions I used in (1) in any
such subtle sense. I meant by each of them precisely what every
reader, in reading them, will have understood me to mean. And
any philosopher, therefore, who holds that any of these
expressions, if understood in this popular manner, expresses a
proposition which embodies some popular error, is disagreeing
with me and holding a view incompatible with (2), even though he
may hold that there is some other, true, proposition which the
expression in question might be legitimately used to express.

In what I have just said, I have assumed that there is some
meaning which is the ordinary or popular meaning of such
expressions as 'The earth has existed for many years past'. And
this, I am afraid, is an assumption which some philosophers are
capable of disputing. They seem to think that the question 'Do
you believe that the earth has existed for many years past?' is not
a plain question, such as should be met either by a plain 'Yes' or
'No', or by a plain 'I can't make up my mind', but is the sort of
question which can be properly met by: 'It all depends on what
you mean by "the earth" and "exists" and "years": if you mean so
and so, and so and so, and so and so, then I do; but if you mean
so and so, and so and so, and so and so, or so and so, and so and
so, and so and so, or so and so, and so and so, and so and so,
then I don't, or at least I think it is extremely doubtful'. It
seems to me that such a view is as profoundly mistaken as any
view can be. Such an expression as 'The earth has existed for
many years past' is the very type of an unambiguous expression,
the meaning of which we all understand. Anyone who takes a
contrary view must, I suppose, be confusing the question whether
we understand its meaning (which we all certainly do) with the
entirely different question whether we know what it means, in the
sense that we are able to give a correct analysis of its meaning.
The question what is the correct analysis of the proposition meant
on any occasion (for, of course, as I insisted in defining (2), a
different proposition is meant at every different time at which the
expression is used) by 'The earth has existed for many years past'
is, it seems to me, a profoundly difficult question, and one to
which, as I shall presently urge, no one knows the answer. But to
hold that we do not know what, in certain respects, is the analysis
of what we understand by such an expression, is an entirely
different thing from holding that we do not understand the
expression. It is obvious that we cannot even raise the question
how what we do understand by it is to be analysed, unless we do
understand it. So soon, therefore, as we know that a person who
uses such an expression is using it in its ordinary sense, we
understand his meaning. So that in explaining that I was using the
expressions used in (1) in their ordinary sense (those of them
which have an ordinary sense, which is not the case with quite all
of them), I have done all that is required to make my meaning
dear.
But now, assuming that the expressions which I have used to

110

111

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

express (2) are understood, I think, as I have said, that many
philosophers have really held views incompatible with (2). And
the philosophers who have done so may, I think, be divided into
two main groups. A. What (2) asserts is, with regard to a whole
set of classes of propositions, that we have, each of us, frequently
known to be true propositions belonging to each of these classes.
And one way of holding a view incompatible with this proposition
is, of course, to hold, with regard to one or more of the classes in
question, that no propositions of that class are true - that all of
them are, at least partially, false; since if, in the case of any one of
these classes, no propositions of that class are true, it is obvious
that nobody can have known any propositions of that class to be
true, and therefore that we cannot have known to be true
propositions belonging to each of these classes. And my first
group of philosophers consists of philosophers who have held
views incompatible with (2) for this reason. They have held,
with regard to one or more of the classes in question, simply
that no propositions of that class are true. Some of them have
held this with regard to all the classes in question; some only with
regard to some of them. But, of course, whichever of these two
views they have held, they have been holding a view inconsistent
with (2). B. Some philosophers, on the other hand, have not
ventured to assert, with regard to any of the classes in (2), that no
propositions of that class are true, but what they have asserted is
that, in the case of some of these classes, no human being has
ever known, with certainty, that any propositions of the class in
question are true. That is to say, they differ profoundly from
philosophers of group A, in that they hold that propositions of all
these classes may be true; but nevertheless they hold a view
incompatible with (2) since they hold, with regard to some of
these classes, that none of us has ever known a proposition of the
class in question to be true.
A. I said that some philosophers, belonging to this group, have
held that no propositions belonging to any of the classes in (2) are
wholly true, while others have only held this with regard to some
of the classes in (2). And I think the chief division of this kind has
been the following. Some of the propositions in (1) (and,
therefore, of course, all propositions belonging to the
corresponding classes in (2)) are propositions which cannot be
true, unless some material things have existed and have stood in
112

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

spatial relations to one another: that is to say, they are propositions which, in a certain sense, imply the reality of material

things, and the reality of Space. E.g., the proposition that my
body has existed for many years past, and has, at every moment
during that time been either in contact with or not far from the
earth, is a proposition which implies both the reality of material
things (provided you use 'material things' in such a sense that to
deny the reality of material things implies that no proposition
which asserts that human bodies have existed, or that the earth
has existed, is wholly true) and also the reality of Space (provided, again, that you use 'Space' in such a sense that to deny the
reality of Space implies that no proposition which asserts that
anything has ever been in contact with or at a distance from
another, in the familiar senses pointed out in (1), is wholly true).
But others among the propositions in (1) (and, therefore, propositions belonging to the corresponding classes in (2)), do not (at
least obviously) imply either the reality of material things or the
reality of Space: e.g., the propositions that I have often had
dreams, and have had many different feelings at different times.
It is true that propositions of this second class do imply one thing
which is also implied by all propositions of the first, namely that
(in a certain sense) Time is real, and imply also one thing not
implied by propositions of the first class, namely that (in a certain
sense) at least one Self is real. But I think there are some

philosophers, who, while denying that (in the senses in question)
either material things or Space are real, have been willing to admit
that Selves and Time are real, in the sense required. Other
philosophers, on the other hand, have used the expression
Time is not real', to express some view that they held; and some,
at least, of these have, I think, meant by this expression
something which is incompatible with the truth of any of the
propositions in (1) - they have meant, namely, that every
proposition of the sort that is expressed by the use of 'now7 or 'at
present, e.g., 'I am now both seeing and hearing' or
These exists at present a living human body', or by the use of a
past tense, e.g., 'I have had many experiences in the past, or 'The
earth has existed for many years', are, at least partially, false.
All the four expressions I have just introduced, namely 'Material things are not real', 'Space is not real', Time is not real', The
Self is not real', are, I think, unlike the expressions I used in (1),
really ambiguous. And it may be that, in the case of each of
113

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

them, some philosopher has used the expression in question to
express some view he held which was not incompatible with (2).
With such philosophers, if there are any, I am not, of course, at
present concerned. But it seems to me that the most natural and
proper usage of each of these expressions is a usage in which it
does express a view incompatible with (2); and, in the case of
each of them, some philosophers have, I think, really used the
expression in question to express such a view. All such philosophers have, therefore, been holding a view incompatible with
(2).
All such views, whether incompatible with all of the propositions in (1), or only with some of them, seem to me to be quite
certainly false; and I think the following points are specially
deserving of notice with regard to them.
(a) If any of the classes of propositions in (2) is such that no
proposition of that class is true, then no philosopher has ever
existed, and therefore none can ever have held with regard to any
such class, that no proposition belonging to it is true. In other
words, the proposition that some propositions belonging to each of
these classes are true is a proposition which has the peculiarity,
that, if any philosopher has ever denied it, it follows from the fact
that he has denied it, that he must have been wrong in denying it.
For when I speak of 'philosophers' I mean, of course (as we all
do), exclusively philosophers who have been human beings, with
human bodies that have lived upon the earth, and who have at
different times had many different experiences. If, therefore, there
have been any philosophers, there have been human beings of this
class; and if there have been human beings of this class, all the
rest of what is asserted in (1) is certainly true too. Any view,
therefore, incompatible with the proposition that many
propositions corresponding to each of the propositions in (1) are
true, can only be true, on the hypothesis that no philosopher has
ever held any such view. It follows, therefore, that, in considering
whether this proposition is true, I cannot consistently regard the
fact that many philosophers, whom I respect, have, to the best of
my belief, held views incompatible with it, as having any weight at
all against it. Since, if I know that they have held such views, I
am, ipso facto, knowing that they were mistaken; and, if I have
no reason to believe that the proposition in question is true, I have
still less reason to believe that they have held views incompatible
with it;
114

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

since I am more certain that they have existed and held some
views, i.e., that the proposition in question is true, than that they
have held any views incompatible with it.
(b) It is, of course, the case that all philosophers who have held
such views have repeatedly, even in their philosophical works,
expressed other views inconsistent with them: i.e., no philosopher
has ever been able to hold such views consistently. One way in
which they have betrayed this inconsistency, is by alluding to the
existence of other philosophers. Another way is by alluding to the
existence of the human race, and in particular by using 'we' in the
sense in which I have already constantly used it, in which any
philosopher who asserts that 'we' do so and so, e.g., that 'we
sometimes believe propositions that are not true', is asserting not
only that he himself has done the thing in question, but that very
many other human beings, who have had bodies and lived upon
the earth, have done the same. The fact is, of course, that all
philosophers have belonged to the class of human beings
which exists only if (2) be true: that is to say, to the class of
human beings who have frequently known prop- ositions
corresponding to each of the propositions in (1). In
holding views incompatible with the proposition that propositions of all these classes are true, they have, therefore, been
holding views inconsistent with propositions which they them
selves knew to be true; and it was, therefore, only to be expected
that they should sometimes betray their knowledge of
such propositions. The strange thing is that philosophers
should have been able to hold sincerely, as part of their
philosophical creed, propositions inconsistent with what
they themselves knew to be true; and yet, so far as I can make
out, this has really frequently happened. My position, therefore,
on this first point, differs from that of philosophers belonging to
this group A, not in that I hold anything which they don't hold,
but only in that I don't hold, as part of my philosophical creed,
things which they do hold as part of theirs - that is to say,
propositions inconsistent with some which they and I both hold in
common. But this difference seems to me to be an important one.
(c) Some of these philosophers have brought forward, in
favour of their position, arguments designed to show, in
the case of some or all of the propositions in (1), that no
propositions of that type can possibly be wholly true, because
every such proposition entails both of two incompatible
propositions.
115

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

And I admit, of course, that if any of the propositions in (1) did
entail both of two incompatible propositions it could not be true.
But it seems to me I have an absolutely conclusive argument to
show that none of them does entail both of two incompatible
propositions. Namely this: All of the propositions in (1) are true;
no true proposition entails both of two incompatible propositions;
therefore, none of the propositions in (1) entails both of two
incompatible propositions.
(d) Although, as I have urged, no philosopher who has held
with regard to any of these types of proposition that no propositions of that type are true, has failed to hold also other views
inconsistent with his view in this respect, yet I do not think that
the view, with regard to any or all of these types, that no
proposition belonging to them is true, is in itself a selfcontradictory view, i.e., entails both of two incompatible propositions. On the contrary, it seems to me quite clear that it might
have been the case that Time was not real, material things not
real, space not real, selves not real. And in favour of my view
that none of these things, which might have been the case, is in
fact the case, I have, I think, no better argument than simply this
- namely, that all the propositions in (1) are, in fact, true.
B. This view, which is usually considered a much more modest
view than A, has, I think, the defect that, unlike A, it really is selfcontradictory, i.e., entails both of two mutually incompatible
propositions.
Most philosophers who have held this view, have held, I think,
that though each of us knows propositions corresponding to some
of the propositions in (1), namely to those which merely assert
that I myself have had in the past experiences of certain kinds at
many different times, yet none of us knows for certain any
propositions either of the type (a) which assert the existence of
material things or of the type (b) which assert the existence of
other selves, beside myself, and that they also have had experiences. They admit that we do in fact believe propositions of both
these types, and that they may be true: some would even say that
we know them to be highly probable; but they deny that we ever
know them, for certain, to be true. Some of them have spoken of
such beliefs as 'beliefs of Common Sense', expressing thereby
their conviction that beliefs of this kind are very commonly
entertained by mankind: but they are convinced that these things
are, in all cases, only believed, not known for certain;

and some have expressed this by saying that they are matters of
Faith, not of Knowledge.
Now the remarkable thing which those who take this view have
not, I think, in general duly appreciated, is that, in each case, the
philosopher who takes it is making an assertion about 'us' - that is
to say, not merely about himself, but about many other human
beings as well. When he says 'No human being has ever known
of the existence of other human beings', he is saying: 'There have
been many other human beings beside myself, and none of them
(including myself) has ever known the existence of other human
beings'. If he says: 'These beliefs are beliefs of Common Sense,
but they are not matters of knowledge', he is saying: 'There have
been many other human beings, beside myself, who have shared
these beliefs, but neither I nor any of the rest have ever known
them to be true'. In other words, he asserts with confidence that
these beliefs are beliefs of Common Sense, and seems often to
fail to notice that, if they are, they must be true; since the
proposition that they are beliefs of Common Sense is one which
logically entails the proposition both of type (a) and of type (b); it
logically entails the proposition that many human beings, beside
the philosopher himself, have had human bodies, which lived
upon the earth, and have had various experiences, including
beliefs of this kind. This is why this position, as contrasted with
positions of group A, seems to me to be self-contradictory. Its
difference from A consists in the fact that it is making a
proposition about human knowledge in general, and therefore is
actually asserting the existence of many human beings, whereas
philosophers of group A in stating their position are not doing this:
they are only contradicting other things which they hold. It is true
that a philosopher who says 'There have existed many human
beings beside myself, and none of us has ever known the
existence of any human beings beside himself, is only
contradicting himself if what he holds is 'There have certainly
existed many human beings beside myself' or, in other words, 'I
know that there have existed other human beings beside myself'.
But this, it seems to me, is what such philosophers have in fact
been generally doing. They seem to me constantly to betray the
fact that they regard the proposition that those beliefs are beliefs
of Common Sense, or the proposition that they themselves are
not the only members of the human race, as not merely true, but
certainly true; and certainly

116

117

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

true it cannot be, unless one member, at least, of the human race,
namely themselves, has known the very things which that
member is declaring that no human being has ever known.
Nevertheless, my position that I know, with certainty, to be true
all of the propositions in (1), is certainly not a position, the denial
of which entails both of two incompatible propositions. If I do
know all these propositions to be true, then, I think, it is quite
certain that other human beings also have known corresponding
propositions: that is to say (2) also is true, and I know it to be
true. But do I really know all the propositions in (1) to be true?
Isn't it possible that I merely believe them? Or know them to be
highly probable? In answer to this question, I think I have nothing
better to say than that it seems to me that I do know them, with
certainty. It is, indeed, obvious that, in the case of most of them, I
do not know them directly: that is to say, I only know them
because, in the past, I have known to be true other propositions
which were evidence for them. If, for instance, I do know that the
earth had existed for many years before I was born, I certainly
only know this because I have known other things in the past
which were evidence for it. And I certainly do not know exactly
what the evidence was. Yet all this seems to me to be no good
reason for doubting that I do know it. We are all, I think, in
this strange position that we do know many things, with
regard to which we know further that we must have had evidence
for them, and yet we do not know how we know them, i.e., we
do not know what the evidence was. If there is any 'we', and if
we know that there is, this must be so: for that there is a 'we', is
one of the things in question. And that I do know that there is a
'we', that is to say, that many other human beings, with human
bodies, have lived upon the earth, it seems to me that I do know,
for certain.
If this first point in my philosophical position, namely my belief
in (2), is to be given any name, which has actually been used by
philosophers in classifying the positions of other philosophers, it
would have, I think, to be expressed by saying that I am one of
those philosophers who have held that the 'Common Sense view
of the world' is, in certain fundamental features, wholly true. But
it must be remembered that, according to me, all philosophers,
without exception, have agreed with me in holding this: and that
the real difference, which is commonly expressed in this way,
is only a difference between those

philosophers, who have also held views inconsistent with these
features in 'the Common Sense view of the world', and those
who have not.
The features in question (namely, propositions of any of the
classes defined in defining (2)) are all of them features, which
have this peculiar property - namely, that if we know that they are

118

119

features in the 'Common Sense view of the world', it follows that
they are true: it is self-contradictory to maintain that we know

them to be features in the Common Sense view, and that yet they
are not true; since to say that we know this, is to say that they are
true. And many of them also have the further peculiar property
that, if they are features in the Common Sense view of the world
(whether 'we' know this or not), it follows that they are true, since to
say that there is a 'Common Sense view of the world', is to say

that they are true. The phrases 'Common Sense view of the
world' or 'Common Sense beliefs' (as used by
philosophers) are, of course, extraordinarily vague; and, for all
I know, there may be many propositions which may be properly
called features in 'the Common Sense view of the world' or
'Common Sense beliefs', which are not true, and which deserve to
be mentioned with the contempt with which some philosophers
speak of 'Common Sense beliefs'. But to speak with contempt of
those 'Common Sense beliefs' which I have mentioned is quite
certainly the height of absurdity. And there are, of course,
enormous numbers of other features in 'the Common Sense view
of the world' which, if these are true, are quite certainly true too:
e.g., that there have lived upon the surface of the earth not only
human beings, but also many different species of plants and
animals, etc., etc.
II. What seems to me the next in importance of the points in
which my philosophical position differs from positions held by
some other philosophers, is one which I will express in the
following way. I hold, namely, that there is no good reason to
suppose either (A) that every physical fact is logically dependent
upon some mental fact or (B) that every physical fact is causally
dependent upon some mental fact. In saying this, I am not, of
course, saying that there are any physical facts which are wholly
independent (i.e., both logically and causally) of mental facts: I
do, in fact, believe that there are; but that is not what I am
asserting. I am only asserting that there is no good reason to

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

suppose the contrary; by which I mean, of course, that none of
the human beings, who have had human bodies that lived upon
the earth, have, during the lifetime of their bodies, had any good
reason to suppose the contrary. Many philosophers have, I think,
not only believed either that every physical fact is logically
dependent upon some mental fact ('physical fact' and 'mental
fact' being understood in the sense in which I am using these
terms) or that every physical fact is causally dependent upon
some mental fact, or both, but also that they themselves had good
reason for these beliefs. In this respect, therefore, I differ from
them.
In the case of the term 'physical fact', I can only explain how I
am using it by giving examples. I mean by 'physical facts', facts
like the following: 'That mantelpiece is at present nearer to this
body than that bookcase is', The earth has existed for many years
past', 'The moon has at every moment for many years past been
nearer to the earth than to the sun', 'That mantelpiece is of a light
colour'. But, when I say 'facts like these', I mean, of course, facts
like them in a certain respect; and what this respect is I cannot
define. The term 'physical fact' is, however, in common use; and
I think that I am using it in its ordinary sense. Moreover,
there is no need for a definition to make my point clear; since
among the examples I have given there are some with regard to
which I hold that there is no reason to suppose them (i.e., these
particular physical facts) either logically or causally dependent
upon any mental fact.
'Mental fact', on the other hand, is a much more unusual
expression, and I am using it in a specially limited sense, which,
though I think it is a natural one, does need to be explained.
There may be many other senses in which the term can be
properly used, but I am only concerned with this one; and hence
it is essential that I should explain what it is.
There may, possibly, I hold, be 'mental facts' of three different
kinds. It is only with regard to the first kind that I am sure that
there are facts of that kind; but if there were any facts of either of
the other two kinds, they would be 'mental facts' in my limited
sense, and therefore I must explain what is meant by the
hypothesis that there are facts of those two kinds.
(a) My first kind is this. I am conscious now; and also I am
seeing something now. These two facts are both of them mental
facts of my first kind; and my first kind consists exclusively

of facts which resemble one or other of the two in a certain

120

121

respect.

(a) The fact that I am conscious now is obviously, in a certain
sense, a fact, with regard to a particular individual and a particular
time, to the effect that that individual is conscious at that time.
And every fact which resembles this one in that respect is to be
included in my first kind of mental fact. Thus the fact that I was
also conscious at many different times yesterday is not itself a
fact of this kind: but it entails that there are (or, as we should
commonly say, because the times in question are past times,
'were') many other facts of this kind, namely each of the facts,
which, at each of the times in question, I could have properly
expressed by 'I am conscious now'. Any fact which is, in this
sense, a fact with regard to an individual and a time (whether the
individual be myself or another, and whether the time be past or
present), to the effect that that individual is conscious at that
time, is to be included in my first kind of mental fact: and I call
such facts, facts of class (a).
0) The second example I gave, namely the fact that I am seeing
something now, is obviously related to the fact that I am
conscious now in a peculiar manner. It not only entails the fact
that I am conscious now (for from the fact that I am seeing
something it follows that I am conscious: I could not have been
seeing anything, unless I had been conscious, though I might quite
well have been conscious without seeing anything) but it also is a
fact, with regard to a specific way (or mode) of being conscious,
to the effect that I am conscious in that way: in the same sense in
which the proposition (with regard to any particular thing) 'This is
red' both entails the proposition (with regard to the same thing)
'This is coloured', and is also a proposition, with regard to a
specific way of being coloured, to the effect that that thing is
coloured in that way. And any fact which is related in this peculiar
manner to any fact of class (a), is also to be included in my first
kind of mental fact, and is to be called a fact of class (P). Thus
the fact that I am hearing now is, like the fact that I am seeing
now, a fact of class (P); and so is any fact, with regard to myself
and a past time, which could at that time have been properly
expressed by 'I am dreaming now', T am imagining now', 'I am at
present aware of the fact that. . .', etc., etc. In short, any fact,
which is a fact with regard to a particular individual (myself or
another), a particular time (past or present),

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

and any particular kind of experience, to the effect that that indi vidual

is having at that time an experience of that particular kind, is a fact
of class (P): and only such facts are facts of class (P).
My first kind of mental facts consists exclusively of facts of
classes (a) and (P), and consists of all facts of either of these
kinds.
(b) That there are many facts of classes (a) and (P) seems to me
perfectly certain. But many philosophers seem to me to have held a
certain view with regard to the analysis of facts of class (a), which
is such that, if it were true, there would be facts of another kind,
which I should wish also to call 'mental facts'. I don't feel at all sure
that this analysis is true; but it seems to me that it may be true; and
since we can understand what is meant by the supposition that it is
true, we can also understand what is meant by the supposition that
there are 'mental facts' of this second kind.
Many philosophers have, I think, held the following view as to
the analysis of what each of us knows, when he knows (at any
time) 'I am conscious now'. They have held, namely, that there is a
certain intrinsic property (with which we are all of us familiar and
which might be called that of 'being an experience') which is such
that, at any time at which any man knows 'I am conscious now', he
is knowing, with regard to that property and himself and the time in
question, 'There is occurring now an event which has this property
(i.e., "is an experience") and which is an experience of mine', and
such that this fact is what he expresses by 'I am conscious now'.
And if this view is true, there must be many facts of each of three
kinds, each of which I should wish to call 'mental facts'; viz. (1)
facts with regard to some event, which has this supposed intrinsic
property, and to some time, to the effect that that event is occurring
at that time, (2) facts with regard to this supposed intrinsic property
and some time, to the effect that some event which has that
property is occurring at that time, and (3) facts with regard to some
property, which is a specific way of having the supposed intrinsic
property (in the sense above explained in which Toeing red' is a
specific way of 'being coloured') and some time, to the effect that
some event which has that specific property is occurring at that
time. Of course, there not only are not, but cannot be, facts of any
of these kinds, unless there is an intrinsic property
122

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

related to what each of us (on any occasion) expresses by 'I am
conscious now7, in the manner defined above; and I feel very
doubtful whether there is any such property; in other words,
although I know for certain both that I have had many experiences, and that I have had experiences of many different kinds, I
feel very doubtful whether to say the first is the same thing as to
say that there have been many events, each of which was an
experience and an experience of mine, and whether to say the
second is the same thing as to say that there have been many
events, each of which was an experience of mine, and each of
which also had a different property, which was a specific way of
being an experience. The proposition that I have had experiences
does not necessarily entail the proposition that there have been
any events which were experiences; and I cannot satisfy myself
that I am acquainted with any events of the supposed kind. But
yet it seems to me possible that the proposed analysis of 'I am
conscious now' is correct: that I am really acquainted with events
of the supposed kind, though I cannot see that I am. And if I am,
then I should wish to call the three kinds of facts defined above
'mental facts'. Of course, if there are 'experiences' in the sense
defined, it would be possible (as many have held) that there can
be no experiences which are not some individual's experiences;
and in that case any fact of any of these three kinds would be
logically dependent on, though not necessarily identical with, some
fact of class (a) or class (P). But it seems to me also a possibility
that, if there are 'experiences', there might be experiences which
did not belong to any individual; and, in that case, there would be
'mental facts' which were neither identical with nor logically
dependent on any fact of class (a) or class (p). (c) Finally some
philosophers have, so far as I can make out, held that there are or
may be facts which are facts with regard to some individual, to the
effect that he is conscious, or is conscious in some specific way,
but which differ from facts of classes (a) and (P), in the important
respect that they are not facts with regard to any time: they have
conceived the possibility that there may be one or more
individuals, who are timelessly conscious, and timelessly
conscious in specific modes. And others, again, have, I think,
conceived the hypothesis that the intrinsic property defined in (b)
may be one which does not belong only to events, but may also
belong to one or more wholes, which do not occur at any
time: in other words, that
123

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

there may be one or more timeless experiences, which might or
might not be the experiences of some individual. It seems to me
very doubtful whether any of these hypotheses are even possibly
true; but I cannot see for certain that they are not possible: and, if
they are possible, then I should wish to give the name 'mental
fact to any fact (if there were any) of any of the five following
kinds, viz. (1) to any fact which is the fact, with regard to any
individual, that he is timelessly conscious, (2) to any fact which is
the fact, with regard to any individual, that he is timelessly
conscious in any specific way, (3) to any fact which is the fact
with regard to a timeless experience that it exists, (4) to any fact
which is the fact with regard to the supposed intrinsic property
'being an experience', that something timelessly exists which has
that property, and (5) to any fact which is the fact, with regard to
any property, which is a specific mode of this supposed intrinsic
property, that something timelessly exists which has that
property.
I have, then, defined three different kinds of facts, each of
which is such that, if there were any facts of that kind (as there
certainly are, in the case of the first kind), the facts in question
would be 'mental facts' in my sense; and to complete the definition of the limited sense in which I am using 'mental facts', I
have only to add that I wish also to apply the name to one fourth
class of facts: namely to any fact, which is the fact, with regard to
any of these three kinds of facts, or any kinds included in them,
that there are facts of the kind in question; i.e., not only will each
individual fact of class (a) be, in my sense, a 'mental fact', but
also the general fact 'that there are facts of class (a)', will itself be
a 'mental fact'; and similarly in all other cases: e.g., not only will
the fact that I am now perceiving (which is a fact of class (P)) be
a 'mental fact', but also the general fact that there are facts, with
regard to individuals and times, to the effect that the individual in
question is perceiving at the time in question, will be a 'mental
fact'.
A. Understanding 'physical fact' and 'mental fact' in the
senses just explained, I hold, then, that there is no good reason to
suppose that every physical fact is logically dependent upon
some mental fact. And I use the phrase, with regard to two facts,
F1 and F2, ' F1 is logically dependent on F2', wherever and only
where F1 entails F2, either in the sense in which the proposition 'I
am seeing now' entails the proposition 'I am conscious

now', or the proposition (with regard to any particular thing) 'This
is red' entails the proposition (with regard to the same thing) 'This
is coloured', or else in the more strictly logical sense in which (for
instance) the conjunctive proposition 'All men are mortal', and
'Mr Baldwin is a man' entails the proposition 'Mr Baldwin is
mortal'. To say, then, of two facts, F1 and F2, that F1 is not
logically dependent upon F2, is only to say that F1 might have
been a fact, even if there had been no such fact as F2; or that the
conjunctive proposition 'F1 is a fact, but there is no such fact as
F2' is a proposition which is not self-contradictory, i.e., does not
entail both of two mutually incompatible propositions.
I hold, then, that, in the case of some physical facts, there is no
good reason to suppose that there is some mental fact, such that
the physical fact in question could not have been a fact unless the
mental fact in question had also been one. And my position is
perfectly definite, since I hold that this is the case with all the four
physical facts, which I have given as examples of physical facts.
For example, there is no good reason to suppose that there is any
mental fact whatever, such that the fact that that mantelpiece is at
present nearer to my body than that bookcase could not have
been a fact, unless the mental fact in question had also been a
fact; and, similarly, in all the other three cases.
In holding this I am certainly differing from some philosophers.
I am, for instance, differing from Berkeley, who held that that
mantelpiece, that bookcase, and my body are, all of them, either
'ideas' or 'constituted by ideas', and that no 'idea' can possibly
exist without being perceived. He held, that is, that this physical
fact is logically dependent upon a mental fact of my fourth class:
namely a fact which is the fact that there is at least one fact,
which is a fact with regard to an individual and the present time,
to the effect that that individual is now perceiving something. He
does not say that this physical fact is logically dependent upon
any fact which is a fact of any of my first three classes, e.g., on
any fact which is the fact, with regard to a particular individual
and the present time, that that individual is now perceiving
something: what he does say is that the physical fact couldn't
have been a fact, unless it had been a fact that there was some
mental fact of this sort. And it seems to me that many
philosophers, who would perhaps disagree either with
Berkeley's assumption that my body is an 'idea' or 'constituted by
ideas', or with his assumption that 'ideas' cannot exist without

124

125

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

being perceived, or with both, nevertheless would agree with him
in thinking that this physical fact is logically dependent upon some
'mental fact': e.g., they might say that it could not have been a
fact, unless there had been, at some time or other, or, were
tunelessly, some 'experience'. Many, indeed, so far as I can make
out, have held that every fact is logically dependent on every
other fact. And, of course, they have held in the case of their
opinions, as Berkeley did in the case of his, that they had good
reasons for them.
B. I also hold that there is no good reason to suppose that
every physical fact is causally dependent upon some mental fact.
By saying that F1 is causally dependent on F2, I mean only that
F1 wouldn't have been a fact unless F2 had been; not (which is
what 'logically dependent' asserts) that F1 couldn't conceivably
have been a fact, unless F2 had been. And I can illustrate my
meaning by reference to the example which I have just given.
The fact that that mantelpiece is at present nearer to my body
than that bookcase, is (as I have just explained) so far as I can
see, not logically dependent upon any mental fact; it might have
been a fact, even if there had been no mental facts. But it
certainly is causally dependent on many mental facts: my body
would not have been here unless I had been conscious in various
ways in the past; and the mantelpiece and the bookcase certainly
would not have existed, unless other men had been conscious
too.
But with regard to two of the facts, which I gave as instances
of physical facts, namely the fact that the earth has existed for
many years past, and the fact that the moon has for many years
past been nearer to the earth than to the sun, I hold that there is
no good reason to suppose that these are causally dependent
upon any mental fact. So far as I can see, there is no reason to
suppose that there is any mental fact of which it could be truly
said: unless this fact had been a fact, the earth would not have
existed for many years past. And in holding this, again, I think I
differ from some philosophers. I differ, for instance, from those
who have held that all material things were created by God, and
that they had good reasons for supposing this.

that I differ also from all philosophers who have held that there is
good reason to suppose that there is a God at all, whether or not
they have held it likely that he created all material things.
And similarly, whereas some philosophers have held that there
is good reason to suppose that we, human beings, shall continue
to exist and to be conscious after the death of our bodies, I hold
that there is no good reason to suppose this.

III. I have just explained that I differ from those philosophers
who have held that there is good reason to suppose that all
material things were created by God. And it is, I think, an
important point in my position, which should be
mentioned,
126

IV. I now come to a point of a very different order.
As I have explained under I, I am not at all sceptical as to the
truth of such propositions as 'The earth has existed for many
years past', 'Many human bodies have each lived for many years
upon if, i.e., propositions which assert the existence of material
things: on the contrary, I hold that we all know, with certainty,
many such propositions to be true. But I am very sceptical as to
what, in certain respects, the correct analysis of such propositions
is. And this is a matter as to which I think I differ from many
philosophers. Many seem to hold that there is no doubt at all as to
their analysis, nor, therefore, as to the analysis of the proposition
'Material things have existed', in certain respects in which I hold
that the analysis of the propositions in question is extremely
doubtful; and some of them, as we have seen, while holding that
there is no doubt as to their analysis, seem to have doubted
whether any such propositions are true. I, on the other hand,
while holding that there is no doubt whatever that many such
propositions are wholly true, hold also that no philosopher,
hitherto, has succeeded in suggesting an analysis of them, as
regards certain important points, which comes anywhere near to
being certainly true.
It seems to me quite evident that the question how propositions
of the type I have just given are to be analysed, depends on the
question how propositions of another and simpler type are to be
analysed. I know, at present, that I am perceiving a human hand,
a pen, a sheet of paper, etc.; and it seems to me that I cannot
know how the proposition 'Material things exist' is to be analysed,
until I know how, in certain respects, these simpler propositions
are to be analysed. But even these are not simple enough. It
seems to me quite evident that my knowledge that I am now
perceiving a human hand is a deduction from a pair of
propositions simpler still - propositions which I can only express
in the form 'I am perceiving this' and 'This is a human
127

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

hand'. It is the analysis of propositions of the latter kind which
seems to me to present such great difficulties, while nevertheless
the whole question as to the nature of material things obviously
depends upon their analysis. It seems to me a surprising thing that
so few philosophers, while saying a great deal as to what material
things are and as to what it is to perceive them, have attempted
to give a dear account as to what precisely they suppose
themselves to know (or to judge, in case they have held that we
don't know any such propositions to be true, or even that no such
propositions are true) when they know or judge such things as
'This is a hand', 'That is the sun', 'This is a dog', etc., etc., etc.
Two things only seem to me to be quite certain about the
analysis of such propositions (and even with regard to these I am
afraid some philosophers would differ from me) namely that
whenever I know, or judge, such a proposition to be true, (1)
there is always some sense-datum about which the proposition in
question is a proposition - some sense-datum which is a subject
(and, in a certain sense, the principal or ultimate subject) of the
proposition in question, and (2) that, nevertheless, what I am
knowing or judging to be true about this sense-datum is not (in
general) that it is itself a hand, or a dog, or the sun, etc., etc., as
the case may be.
Some philosophers have I think doubted whether there are any
such things as other philosophers have meant by 'sense-data' or
'sensa'. And I think it is quite possible that some philosophers
(including myself, in the past) have used these terms in senses
such that it is really doubtful whether there are any such things.
But there is no doubt at all that there are sense-data, in the sense
in which I am now using that term! I am at present seeing a great
number of them, and feeling others. And in order to point out to
the reader what sort of things I mean by sense-data, I need only
ask him to look at his own right hand. If he does this he will be
able to pick out something (and, unless he is seeing double, only
one thing) with regard to which he will see that it is, at first sight,
a natural view to take that that thing is identical, not, indeed, with
his whole right hand, but with that part of its surface which he is
actually seeing, but will also (on a little reflection) be able to see
that it is doubtful whether it can be identical with the part of the
surface of his hand in question. Things of the sort (in a certain
respect) of which this thing is,
128

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

which he sees in looking at his hand, and with regard to which he
can understand how some philosophers should have supposed it
to be the part of the surface of his hand which he is seeing, while
others have supposed that it can't be, are what I mean by 'sensedata'. I therefore define the term in such a way that it is an open
question whether the sense-datum which I now see in looking at
my hand and which is a sense-datum of my hand is or is not
identical with that part of its surface which I am now actually
seeing.
That what I know, with regard to this sense-datum, when I
know 'This is a human hand', is not that it is itself a human hand,
seems to me certain because I know that my hand has many
parts (e.g., its other side, and the bones inside it), which are quite
certainly not parts of this sense-datum.
I think it certain, therefore, that the analysis of the proposition
'This is a human hand' is, roughly at least, of the form 'There is a
thing, and only one thing, of which it is true both that it is a
human hand and that this surface is a part of its surface'. In other
words, to put my view in terms of the phrase 'theory of representative perception', I hold it to be quite certain that I do not
directly perceive my hand; and that when I am said (as I may be
correctly said) to 'perceive' it, that I 'perceive' it means that I
perceive (in a different and more fundamental sense) something
which is (in a suitable sense) representative of it, namely, a
certain part of its surface.
This is all that I hold to be certain about the analysis of the
proposition 'This is a human hand'. We have seen that it includes
in its analysis a proposition of the form This is part of the surface
of a human hand' (where 'This', of course, has a different
meaning from that which it has in the original proposition which
has now been analysed). But this proposition also is undoubtedly
a proposition about the sense-datum, which I am seeing, which is
a sense-datum of my hand. And hence the further question arises:
What, when I know 'This is part of the surface of a human hand',
am I knowing about the sense-datum in question? Am I, in this
case, really knowing about the sense-datum in question that it
itself is part of the surface of a human hand? Or, just as we found
in the case of 'This is a human hand', that what I was knowing
about the sense-datum was certainly not that it itself was a human
hand, so, is it perhaps the case, with this new proposition,
that even here I am not knowing,
129

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

with regard to the sense-datum, that it is itself part of the surface
of a hand? And, if so, what is it that I am knowing about the
sense-datum itself?
This is the question to which, as it seems to me, no philosopher
has hitherto suggested an answer which comes anywhere near to
being certainly true.
There seem to me to be three, and only three, alternative types
of answer possible; and to any answer yet suggested, of any of
these types, there seem to me to be very grave objections.
(1) Of the first type, there is but one answer: namely, that in
this case what I am knowing really is that the sense-datum itself is
part of the surface of a human hand. In other words that, though
I don't perceive my hand directly, I do directly perceive part of its
surface; that the sense-datum itself is this part of its surface and
not merely something which (in a sense yet to be determined)
'represents' this part of its surface; and that hence the sense in
which I 'perceive' this part of the surface of my hand, is not in its
turn a sense which needs to be defined by reference to yet a third
more ultimate sense of 'perceive', which is the only one in which
perception is direct, namely that in which I perceive the sensedatum.
If this view is true (as I think it may just possibly be), it
seems to me certain that we must abandon a view which has been
held to be certainly true by most philosophers, namely the view
that our sense-data always really have the qualities which they
sensibly appear to us to have. For I know that if another man
were looking through a microscope at the same surface which I
am seeing with the naked eye, the sense-datum which he
saw would sensibly appear to him to have qualities very
different from and incompatible with those which my
sense-datum sensibly appears to me to have: and yet, if my
sense-datum is identical with the surface we are both of us seeing,
his must be identical with it also. My sense-datum can, therefore,
be identical with this surface only on condition that it is identical
with his sense-datum; and, since his sense-datum sensibly appears
to him to have qualities incompatible with those which mine
sensibly appears to me to have, his sense-datum can be identical
with mine only on condition that the sense-datum in question
either has not got the qualities which it sensibly appears to me to
have, or has not got those which it sensibly appears to him to
have.
130

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

I do not, however, think that this is a fatal objection to this first
type of view. A far more serious objection seems to me to be
that, when we see a thing double (have what is called 'a double
image' of it), we certainly have two sense-data each of which is of
the surface seen, and which cannot therefore both be identical
with it; and that yet it seems as if, if any sense-datum is ever
identical with the surface of which it is a sense-datum, each of
these so-called 'images' must be so. It looks, therefore, as if every
sense-datum is, after all, only 'representative' of the surface, of
which it is a sense-datum.
(2) But, if so, what relation has it to the surface in question? This
second type of view is one which holds that when I know 'This is
part of the surface of a human hand', what I am knowing with
regard to the sense-datum which is of that surface, is, not that it is
itself part of the surface of a human hand, but something of the
following kind. There is, it says, some relation, R, such that what
I am knowing with regard to the sense-datum is either 'There is
one thing and only one thing, of which it is true both that it is a
part of the surface of a human hand, and that it has R to this
sense-datum', or else 'There are a set of things, of which it is true
both that that set, taken collectively, are part of the surface of a
human hand, and also that each member of the set has R to this
sense-datum, and that nothing which is not a member of the set
has R to it'.
Obviously, in the case of this second type, many different views
are possible, differing according to the view they take as to what
the relation R is. But there is only one of them, which seems to
me to have any plausibility; namely that which holds that R is an
ultimate and unanalysable relation, which might be expressed by
saying that 'xRy' means the same as 'y is an appearance or
manifestation of x'. I.e. the analysis which this answer would
give of 'This is part of the surface of a human hand'
would be 'There is one and only one thing of which it is true
both that it is part of the surface of a human hand, and that this
sense-datum is an appearance or manifestation of it'.
To this view also there seem to me to be very grave objections,
chiefly drawn from a consideration of the questions how we can
possibly know with regard to any of our sense-data that there is
one thing and one thing only which has to them such a supposed
ultimate relation; and how, if we do, we can possibly
131

G.E. MOORE: SELECTED WRITINGS

know anything further about such things, e.g., of what size or
shape they are.
(3) The third type of answer, which seems to me to be the only
possible alternative if (1) and (2) are rejected, is the type of
answer which J. S. Mill seems to have been implying to be the
true one when he said that material things are 'permanent
possibilities of sensation'. He seems to have thought that when I
know such a fact as 'This is part of the surface of a human hand',
what I am knowing with regard to the sense-datum which is the
principal subject of that fact, is not that it is itself part of the
surface of a human hand, nor yet, with regard to any relation, that
the thing which has to it that relation is part of the surface of a
human hand, but a whole set of hypothetical facts each of which
is a fact of the form 'If these conditions had been fulfilled, I
should have been perceiving a sense-datum intrinsically related to
this sense-datum in this way', 'If these (other) conditions had been
fulfilled, I should have been perceiving a sense-datum intrinsically
related to this sense-datum in this (other) way', etc., etc.
With regard to this third type of view as to the analysis of
propositions of the kind we are considering, it seems to me, again,
just possible that it is a true one; but to hold (as Mill himself and
others seems to have held) that it is certainly, or nearly certainly,
true, seems to me as great a mistake, as to hold with regard either
to (1) or to (2), that they are certainly, or nearly certainly, true.
There seem to me to be very grave objections to it; in particular
the three, (a) that though, in general, when I know such a fact as
'This is a hand', I certainly do know some hypothetical facts of the
form 'If these conditions had been fulfilled, I should have been
perceiving a sense-datum of this kind, which would have been a
sense-datum of the same surface of which this is a sense-datum',
it seems doubtful whether any conditions with regard to which I
know this are not themselves conditions of the form 'If this and
that material thing had been in those positions and conditions . .
.', (b) that it seems again very doubtful whether there is any
intrinsic relation, such that my knowledge that (under these
conditions) I should have been perceiving a sense-datum of this
kind, which would have been a sense-datum of the same surface
of which this is a sense-datum, is equivalent to a knowledge, with
regard to that relation, that I should, under those conditions, have
been perceiving a sense132

A DEFENCE OF COMMON SENSE

datum related by it to this sense-datum, and (c) that, if it were
true, the sense in which a material surface is 'round' or 'square',
would necessarily be utterly different from that in which our
sense-data sensibly appear to us to be 'round' or 'square'.
V. Just as I hold that the proposition 'There are and have been
material things' is quite certainly true, but that the question how
this proposition is to be analysed is one to which no answer that
has been hitherto given is anywhere near certainly true; so I hold
that the proposition 'There are and have been many Selves' is
quite certainly true, but that here again all the analyses of this
proposition that have been suggested by philosophers are
highly doubtful.
That I am now perceiving many different sense-data, and that I
have at many times in the past perceived many different sensedata, I know for certain - that is to say, I know that there are
mental facts of class (P), connected in a way which it is proper to
express by saying that they are all of them facts about me; but
how this kind of connexion is to be analysed, I do not know for
certain, nor do I think that any other philosopher knows with any
approach to certainty. Just as in the case of the proposition 'This
is part of the surface of a human hand', there are several
extremely different views as to its analysis, each of which seems
to me possible, but none nearly certain, so also in the case of the
proposition 'This, that and that sense-datum are all at present
being perceived by me', and still more so in the case of the
proposition 'I am now perceiving this sense-datum, and I have in
the past perceived sense-data of these other kinds'. Of the truth of
these propositions there seems to me to be no doubt, but as to
what is the correct analysis of them there seems to me to be the
gravest doubt - the true analysis may, for instance, possibly be
quite as paradoxical as is the third view given above under IV as
to the analysis of 'This is part of the surface of a human hand';
but whether it is as paradoxical as this seems to me to be quite as
doubtful as in that case. Many philosophers, on the other hand,
seem to me to have assumed that there is little or no doubt as to
the correct analysis of such propositions; and many of these, just
reversing my position, have also held that the propositions
themselves are not true.

133

