Philosophical Review

Main Trends in Recent Philosophy: Two Dogmas of Empiricism
Author(s): W. V. Quine
Source: The Philosophical Review, Vol. 60, No. 1 (Jan., 1951), pp. 20-43
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of Philosophical Review
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2181906
Accessed: 11-04-2019 12:15 UTC
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Philosophical Review, Duke University Press are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to The Philosophical Review

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM'
M ODERN empiricism has been conditioned in large part by two

dogmas. One is a belief in some fundamental cleavage between

truths which are analytic, or grounded in meanings independently o
matters of fact, and truth which are synthetic, or grounded in fact.
The other dogma is reductionism: the belief that each meaningful
statement is equivalent to some logical construct upon terms which
refer to immediate experience. Both dogmas, I shall argue, are ill
founded. One effect of abandoning them is, as we shall see, a blurring
of the supposed boundary between speculative metaphysics and natural
science. Another effect is a shift toward pragmatism.
I. BACKGROUND FOR ANALYTICITY

Kant's cleavage between analytic and synthetic truths was foreshadowed in Hume's distinction between relations of ideas and matters of
fact, and in Leibniz's distinction between truths of reason and truths of

fact. Leibniz spoke of the truths of reason as true in all possible worlds.
Picturesqueness aside, this is to say that the truths of reason are those
which could not possibly be false. In the same vein we hear analytic
statements defined as statements whose denials are self-contradictory.
But this definition has, small explanatory value; for the notion of self-

contradictoriness, in the quite broad sense needed for this definition
of analyticity, stands in exactly the same need of clarification as does
the notion of analyticity itself.2 The two notions are the two sides of
a single dubious coin.

Kant conceived of an analytic statement as one that attributes to its
subject no more than is already conceptually contained in the subject.
' Much of this paper is devoted to a critique of analyticity which I have been
urging orally and in correspondence for years past. My debt to the other partici-

pants in those discussions, notably Carnap, Church, Goodman, Tarski, and White,
is large and indeterminate. White's excellent essay "The Analytic and the
Synthetic: An Untenable Dualism," in John Dewey: Philosopher of Science
and Freedom (New York, I950), says much of what needed to be said on the
topic; but in the present paper I touch on some further aspects of the problem.
I am grateful to Dr. Donald L. Davidson for valuable criticism of the first draft.
2 See White, Op. Cit., p. 324.
20

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

This formulation has two shortcomings: it limits itself to statements

of subject-predicate form, and it appeals to a notion of containment
which is left at a metaphorical level. But Kant's intent, evident more
from the use he makes of the notion of analyticity than from his defini-

tion of it, can be restated thus: a statement is analytic when it is true

by virtue of meanings and independently of fact. Pursuing this line,

let us examine the concept of meaning which is presupposed.
We must observe to begin with that meaning is not to be identified
with naming, or reference. Consider Frege's example of 'Evening
Star' and 'Morning Star'. Understood not merely as a recurrent
evening apparition but as a body, the Evening Star is the planet
Venus, and the Morning Star is the same. The two singular terms
name the same thing. But the meanings must be treated as distinct,
since the identity 'Evening Star = Morning Star' is a statement of
fact established by astronomical observation. If 'Evening Star' and

'Morning Star' were alike in meaning, the identity 'Evening Star =
Morning Star' would be analytic.

Again there is Russell's example of 'Scott' and 'the author of

Waverley'. Analysis of the meanings of words was by no means sufficient to reveal to George IV that the person named by these two
singular terms was one and the same.

The distinction between meaning and naming is no less important
at the level of abstract terms. The terms '9' and 'the number of planets'
name one and the same abstract entity but presumably must be re-

garded as unlike in meaning; for astronomical observation was needed,
and not mere reflection on meanings, to determine the sameness of
the entity in question.

Thus far we have been considering singular terms. With general
terms, or predicates, the situation is somewhat different but parallel.
Whereas a singular term purports to name an entity, abstract or con-

crete, a general term does not; but a general term is true of an entity,
or of each of many, or of none. The class of all entities of which a
general term is true is called the extension of the term. Now paralleling

the contrast between the meaning of a singular term and the entity
named, we must distinguish equally between the meaning of a general
term and its extension. The general terms 'creature with a heart' and
21

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

'creature with a kidney', e.g., are perhaps alike in extension but unlike
in meaning.

Confusion of meaning with extension, in the case of general terms,
is less common than confusion of meaning with naming in the case of

singular terms. It is indeed a commonplace in philosophy to oppose

intension (or meaning) to extension, or, in a variant vocabulary,
connotation to denotation.

The Aristotelian notion of essence was the forerunner, no doubt, of

the modern notion of intension or meaning. For Aristotle it was essential in men to be rational, accidental to be two-legged. But there is an
important difference between this attitude and the doctrine of meaning. From the latter point of view it may indeed be conceded (if only

for the sake of argument) that rationality is involved in the meaning
of the word 'man' while two-leggedness is not; but two-leggedness
may at the same time be viewed as involved in the meaning of 'biped'
while rationality is not. Thus from the point of view of the doctrine

of meaning it makes no sense to say of the actual individual, who is
at once a man and a biped, that his rationality is essential and his twoleggedness accidental or vice versa. Things had essences, for Aristotle,

but only linguistic forms have meanings. Meaning is what essence
becomes when it is divorced from the object of reference and wedded
to the word.

For the theory -of meaning the most conspicuous question is as to
the nature of its objects: what sort of things are meanings? They are
evidently intended to be ideas, somehow - mental ideas for some
semanticists, Platonic ideas for others. Objects of either sort are so

elusive, not to say debatable, that there seems little hope of erecting
a fruitful science about them. It is not even clear, granted meanings,
when we have two and when we have one; it is not clear when linguistic forms should be regarded as synonymous, or alike in meaning,
and when they should not. If a standard of synonymy should be arrived at, we may reasonably expect that the appeal to meanings as

entities will not have played a very useful part in the enterprise.
A felt need for meant entities may derive from an earlier failure to

appreciate that meaning and reference are distinct. Once the theory of
meaning is sharply separated from the theory of reference, it is a
short step to recognizing as the business of the theory of meaning
22

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

simply the synonymy of linguistic forms and the analyticity

ments; meanings themselves, as obscure intermediary ent
well be abandoned.

The description of analyticity as truth by virtue of meanings started
us off in pursuit of a concept of meaning. But now we have abandoned

the thought of any special realm of entities called meanings. So the
problem of analyticity confronts us anew.

Statements which are analytic by general philosophical acclaim are

not, indeed, far to seek. They fall into two classes. Those of the first
class, which may be called logically true, are typified by:
(i) No unmarried man is married.

The relevant feature of this example is that it is not merely true as it

stands, but remains true under any and all reinterpretations of 'man'
and 'married'. If we suppose a prior inventory of logical particles, com-

prising 'no', 'un-', 'not', 'if', 'then', 'and', etc., then in general a logical
truth is a statement which is true and remains true under all reinterpretations of its components other than the logical particles.

But there is also a second class of analytic statements, typified by:
(2) No bachelor is married.

The characteristic of such a statement is that it can be turned into
logical truth by putting synonyms for synonyms; thus (2) can be

turned into (i) by putting 'unmarried man' for its synonym 'bache
lor'. We still lack a proper characterization of this second class of

analytic statements, and therewith of analyticity generally, inasmuc

as we have had in the above description to lean on a notion of "synonymy" which is no less in need of clarification than analyticity itself.

In recent years Carnap has tended to explain analyticity by appeal

to what he calls state-descriptions.3 A state-description is any exhau
tive assignment of truth values to the atomic, or noncompound, state-

ments of the language. All other statements of the language are, Car

nap assumes, built up of their component clauses by means of the

familiar logical devices, in such a way that the truth value of any
complex statement is fixed for each state-description by specifiabl
logical laws. A statement is then explained as analytic when it come

out true under every state-description. This account is an adaptatio
'R. Carnap, Meaning and Necessity (Chicago, I947), pp. 9ff.; Logical Founda-

tions of Probability (Chicago, I950), pp. 70ff.
23

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

of Leibniz's "true in all possible worlds." But note that this version of
analyticity serves its purpose only if the atomic statements of the language are, unlike 'John is a bachelor' and 'John is married', mutually
independent. Otherwise there would be a state-description which assigned truth to 'John is a bachelor' and falsity to 'John is married', and

consequently 'All bachelors are married' would turn out synthetic
rather than analytic under the proposed criterion. Thus the criterion
of analyticity in terms of state-descriptions serves only for languages

devoid of extralogical synonym-pairs, such as 'bachelor' and 'unmarried man': synonym-pairs of the type which give rise to the "second
class" of analytic statements. The criterion in terms of state-descriptions is a reconstruction at best of logical truth.

I do not mean to suggest that Carnap is under any illusions on this

point. His simplified model language with its state-descriptions is
aimed primarily not at the general problem of analyticity but at another

purpose, the clarification of probability and induction. Our problem,
however, is analyticity; and here the major difficulty lies not in the
first class of analytic statements, the logical truths, but rather in the
second class, which depends on the notion of synonymy.
II. DEFINITION

There are those who find it soothing to say that the analytic state-

ments of the second class reduce to those of the first class, the logical
truths, by definition; 'bachelor', e.g., is defined as 'unmarried man'.
But how do we find that 'bachelor' is defined as 'unmarried man'?
Who defined it thus, and when? Are we to appeal to the nearest dictionary, and accept the lexicographer's formulation as law? Clearly
this would be to put the cart before the horse. The lexicographer is an

empirical scientist, whose business is the recording of antecedent facts;
and if he glosses 'bachelor' as 'unmarried man' it is because of his belief
that there is a relation of synonymy between these forms, implicit in

general or preferred usage prior to his own work. The notion of
synonymy presupposed here has still to be clarified, presumably in
terms relating to linguistic behavior. Certainly the "definition" which
is the lexicographer's report of an observed synonymy cannot be taken
as the ground of the synonymy.

Definition is not, indeed, an activity exclusively of philologists.
Philosophers and scientists frequently have occasion to "define" a
24

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

recondite term by paraphrasing it into terms of a more familiar vo-

cabulary. But ordinarily such a definition, like the philologist's, is pure
lexicography, affirming a relationship of synonymy antecedent to the
exposition in hand.

Just what it means to affirm synonymy, just what the interconnec-

tions may be which are necessary and sufficient in order that two linguistic forms be properly describable as synonymous, is far from
clear; but, whatever these interconnections may be, ordinarily they
are grounded in usage. Definitions reporting selected instances of
synonymy come then as reports upon usage.

There is also, however, a variant type of definitional activity which
does not limit itself to the reporting of pre-existing synonymies. I
have in mind what Carnap calls explication - an activity to which
philosophers are given, and scientists also in their more philosophical
moments. In explication the purpose is not merely to paraphrase the

definiendum into an outright synonym, but actually to improve upon
the definiendum by refining or supplementing its meaning. But even
explication, though not merely reporting a pre-existing synonymy
between definiendum and definiens, does rest nevertheless on other
pre-existing synonymies. The matter may be viewed as follows. Any

word worth explicating has some contexts which, as wholes, are clear
and precise enough to be useful; and the purpose of explication is to
preserve the usage of these favored contexts while sharpening the

usage of other contexts. In order that a given definition be suitable for
purposes of explication, therefore, what is required is not that the

definiendum in its antecedent usage be synonymous with the
definiens, but just that each of these favored contexts of the definiendum, taken as a whole in its antecedent usage, be synonymous with the
corresponding context of the definiens.

Two alternative definientia -may be equally appropriate for the purposes of a given task of explication and yet not be synonymous with
each other; for they may serve interchangeably within the favored
contexts but diverge elsewhere. By cleaving to one of these definientia

rather than the other, a definition of explicative kind generates, by
fiat, a relationship of synonymy between definiendum and definiens
which did not hold before. But such a definition still owes its explicative function, as seen, to pre-existing synonymies.
25

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

There does, however, remain still an extreme sort of definition
which does not hark back to prior synonymies at all; viz., the explicitly conventional introduction of novel notations for purposes of sheer
abbreviation. Here the definiendum becomes synonymous with the
definiens simply because it has been created expressly for the purpose

of being synonymous with the definiens. Here we have a really transparent case of synonymy created by definition; would that all species
of synonymy were as intelligible. For the rest, definition rests on

synonymy rather than explaining it.
The word 'definition' has come to have a dangerously reassuring

sound, due no doubt to its frequent occurrence in logical and mathematical writings. We shall do well to digress now into a brief appraisal
of the role of definition in formal work.

In logical and mathematical systems either of two mutually antag-

onistic types of economy may be striven for, and each has its peculiar
practical utility. On the one hand we may seek economy of practical

expression: ease and brevity in the statement of multifarious relationships. This sort of economy calls usually for distinctive concise notations for a wealth of concepts. Second, however, and oppositely, we
may seek economy in grammar and vocabulary; we may try to find a

minimum of basic concepts such that, once a distinctive notation has
been appropriated to each of them, it becomes possible to express any

desired further concept by mere combination and iteration of our
basic notations. This second sort of economy is impractical in one

way, since a poverty in basic idioms tends to a necessary lengthening
of discourse. But it is practical in another way: it greatly simplifies

theoretical discourse about the language, through minimizing the terms
and the forms of construction wherein the language consists.

Both sorts of economy, though prima facie incompatible, are valuable in their separate ways. The custom has consequently arisen of
combining both sorts of economy by forging in effect two languages,

the one a part of the other. The inclusive language, though redundant
in grammar and vocabulary, is economical in message lengths, while

the part, called primitive notation, is economical in grammar and vo-

cabulary. Whole and part are correlated by rules of translation whereby each idiom not in primitive notation is equated to some complex
built up of primitive notation. These rules of translation are the so26

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

called definitions which appear in formalized systems. They are best
viewed not as adjuncts to one language but as correlations between
two languages, the one a part of the other.

But these correlations are not arbitrary. They are supposed to show
how the primitive notations can accomplish all purposes, save brevity
and convenience, of the redundant language. Hence the definiendum
and its definiens may be expected, in each case, to be related in one
or another of the three ways lately noted. The definiens may be a
faithful paraphrase of the definiendum into the narrower notation,
preserving a direct synonymy as of antecedent usage; or the definiens

may, in the spirit of explication, improve upon the antecedent usage
of the definiendum; or finally, the definiendum may be a newly created
notation, newly endowed with meaning here and now.
In formal and informal work alike, thus, we find that definition-

except in the extreme case of the explicitly conventional introduction

of new notations - hinges on prior relationships of synonymy. Recognizing then that the notion of definition does not hold the key to
synonymy and analyticity, let us look further into synonymy and say
no more of definition.
III. INTERCHANGEABILITY

A natural suggestion, deserving close examination, is that the
synonymy of two linguistic forms consists simply in their interchange-

ability in all contexts without change of truth value; interchangeability, in Leibniz's phrase, salva veritate. Note that synonyms so
conceived need not even be free from vagueness, as long as the vaguenesses match.

But it is not quite true that the synonyms 'bachelor' and 'unmarried

many are everywhere interchangeable salva veritate. Truths which become false under substitution of 'unmarried man' for 'bachelor' are
easily constructed with help of 'bachelor of arts' or 'bachelor's but-

tons'. Also with help of quotation, thus:
'Bachelor' has less than ten letters.

Such counterinstances can, however, perhaps be set aside by treating

the phrases 'bachelor of arts' and 'bachelor's buttons' and the quotation ''bachelor'' each as a single indivisible word and then stipu-

lating that the interchangeability salva veritate which is to be the
touchstone of synonymy is not supposed to apply to fragmentary oc27

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

currences inside of a word. This account of synonymy, supposing it
acceptable on other counts, has indeed the drawback of appealing to
a prior conception of "word" which can be counted on to present difficulties of formulation in its turn. Nevertheless some progress might
be claimed in having reduced the problem of synonymy to a problem
of wordhood. Let us pursue this line a bit, taking "word" for granted.
The question remains whether interchangeability satlva veritate
(apart from occurrences within words) is a strong enough condition
for synonymy, or whether, on the contrary, some nonsynonymous
expressions might be thus interchangeable. Now let us be clear that
we are not concerned here with synonymy in the sense of complete
identity in psychological associations or poetic quality; indeed no two
expressions are synonymous in such a sense. We are concerned only
with what may be called cognitive synonymy. Just what this is cannot
be said without successfully finishing the present study; but we know
something about it from the need which arose for it in connection
with analyticity in Section I. The sort of synonymy needed there was
merely such that any analytic statement could be turned into a logical
truth by putting synonyms for synonyms. Turning the tables and assuming analyticity, indeed, we could explain cognitive synonymy of
terms as follows (keeping to the familiar example): to say that 'bachelor' and 'unmarried man' are cognitively synonymous is to say no
more nor less than that the statement:

(3) All and only bachelors are unmarried men
is analytic.4

What we need is an account of cognitive synonymy not presuppos-

ing analyticity - if we are to explain analyticity conversely with help

of cognitive synonymy as undertaken in Section I. And indeed such
an independent account of cognitive synonymy is at present up for
consideration, viz., interchangeability salva veritate everywhere except within words. The question before us, to resume the thread at

last, is whether such interchangeability is a sufficient condition for
'This is cognitive synonymy in a primary, broad sense. Carnap (Meaning
and Necessity, pp. 56ff.) and Lewis (Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation

[La Salle, Ill.,'i946], pp. 83ff.) have suggested how, once this notion is at hand,
a narrower sense of cognitive synonymy which is preferable for some purposes
can in turn be derived. But this special ramification of concept-building lies aside
from the present purposes and must not be confused with the broad sort of cognitive synonymy here concerned.
28

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

cognitive synonymy. We can quickly assure ourselves that it is, by

examples of the following sort. The statement:
(4) Necessarily all and only bachelors are bachelors
is evidently true, even supposing 'necessarily' so narrowly construed

as to be truly applicable only to analytic statements. Then, if 'bachelor'
and 'unmarried man' are interchangeable salva veritate, the result
(5) Necessarily, all and only bachelors are unmarried men

of putting 'unmarried man' for an occurrence of 'bachelor' in (4)
must, like (4), be true. But to say that (5) is true is to say that (3)
is analytic, and hence that 'bachelor' and 'unmarried men' are cognitively synonymous.
Let us see what there is about the above argument that gives it its

air of hocus-pocus. The condition of interchangeability salva ve-ritate
varies in its force with variations in the richness of the language at
hand. The above argument supposes we are working with a language
rich enough to contain the adverb 'necessarily', this adverb being so

construed as to yield truth when and only when applied to an analytic
statement. But can we condone a language which contains such an
adverb? Does the adverb really make sense? To suppose that it does
is to suppose that we have already made satisfactory sense of 'analytic'.

Then what are we so hard at work on right now?
Our argument is not flatly circular, but something like it. It has

the form, figuratively speaking, of a closed curve in space.
Interchangeability salva veritate is meaningless until relativized to
a language whose extent is specified in relevant respects. Suppose
now we consider a language containing just the following materials.

There is an indefinitely large stock of one- and many-place predicates,
mostly having to do with extralogical subject matter. The rest of the
language is logical. The atomic sentences consist each of a predicate
followed by one or more variables; and the complex sentences are
built up of atomic ones by truth functions and quantification. In effect
such a language enjoys the benefits also of descriptions and class
names and indeed singular terms generally, these being contextually
definable in known ways.5 Such a language can be adequate to classical mathematics and indeed to scientific discourse generally, except
' See, e.g., my Mathematical Logic (New York, 1940; Cambridge, Mass.,
I947), sec. 24, 26, 27; or Methods of Logic (New York, 1950), sec. 37ff.
29

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

in so far as the latter involves debatable devices such as modal adverbs
and contrary-to-fact conditionals. Now a language of this type is

extensional, in this sense: any two predicates which agree extensional-

ly (i.e., are true of the same objects) are interchangeable salva yeritate.

In an extensional language, therefore, interchangeability salva yeritate is no assurance of cognitive synonymy of the desired type. That
'bachelor' and 'unmarried man' are interchangeable salva veritate' in

an extensional language assures us of no more than that (3) is true
There is no assurance here that the extensional agreement of 'bachelor'

and 'unmarried man' rests on meaning rather than merely on accidental matters of fact, as does extensional agreement of 'creature with a
heart' and 'creature with a kidney'.
For most purposes extensional agreement is the nearest approxima-

tion to synonymy we need care about. But the fact remains that extensional agreement falls far short of cognitive synonymy of the type
required for explaining analyticity in the manner of Section I. The
type of cognitive synonymy required there is such as to equate the
synonymy of 'bachelor' and 'unmarried man' with the analyticity of

(3), not merely with the truth of (3).
So we must recognize that interchangeability salva veritate, if construed in relation to an extensional language, is not a sufficient condition of cognitive synonymy in the sense needed for deriving analyticity in the manner of Section I. If a language contains an intentional
adverb 'necessarily' in the sense lately noted, or other particles to the

same effect, then interchangeability salva veritate in such a language
does afford a sufficient condition of cognitive synonymy; but such a
language is intelligible only if the notion of analyticity is already clearly understood in advance.
The effort to explain cognitive synonymy first, for the sake of deriv-

ing analyticity from it afterward as in Section I, is perhaps the wrong
approach. Instead we might try explaining analyticity somehow with-

out appeal to cognitive synonymy. Afterward we could doubtless derive cognitive synonymy from analyticity satisfactorily enough if desired. We have seen that cognitive synonymy of 'bachelor' and 'un-

married man' can be explained as analyticity of (3). The same explanation works for any pair of one-place predicates, of course, and it

can be extended in obvious fashion to many-place predicates. Other
30

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

syntactical categories can also be accommodated in fairly parallel
fashion. Singular terms may be said to be cognitively synonymous
when the statement of identity formed by putting '=' between them is
analytic. Statements may be said simply to be cognitively synonymous
when their biconditional (the result of joining them by 'if and only if')
is analytic.6 If we care to lump all categories into a single formulation,
at the expense of assuming again the notion of "word" which was

appealed to early in this section, we can describe any two linguistic
forms as cognitively synonymous when the two forms are interchangeable (apart from occurrences within "words") salva (no longer veri-

tate but) canalyticitate. Certain technical questions arise, indeed, over
cases of ambiguity or homonymy; let us not pause for them, however,

for we are already digressing. Let us rather turn our backs on the
problem of synonymy and address ourselves anew to that of analyticity.

IV. SEMANTICAL RULES

Analyticity at first seemed most naturally definable by appeal to a
realm of meanings. On refinement, the appeal to meanings gave way
to an appeal to synonymy or definition. But definition turned out to

be a will-o'-the-wisp, and synonymy turned out to be best understood
only by dint of a prior appeal to analyticity itself. So we are back at

the problem of analyticity.
I do not know whether the statement 'Everything green is extended'
is analytic. Now does my indecision over this example really betray

an incomplete understanding, an incomplete grasp of the "meanings",

of 'green' and 'extended'? I think not. The trouble is not with 'green'
or 'extended', but with 'analytic'.

It is often hinted that the difficulty in separating analytic state-

ments from synthetic ones in ordinary language is due to the vagueness of ordinary language and that the distinction is clear when we

have a precise artificial language with explicit "semantical rules."
This, however, as I shall now attempt to show, is a confusion.
The notion of analyticity about which we are worrying is a pur-

ported relation between statements and languages: a statement S is
said to be analytic for a language L, and the problem is to make sense
8 The 'if and only if' itself is intended in the truth functional sense. See Carnap, Meaning and Necessity, p. 14.
3'

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

of this relation generally, i.e., for variable 'S' and 'L'. The point that I
want to make is that the gravity of this problem is not perceptibly less

for artificial languages than for natural ones. The problem of making
sense of the idiom 'S is analytic for L', with variable 'S' and 'L', retains its stubbornness even if we limit the range of the variable 'L' to
artificial languages. Let me now try to make this point evident.

For artificial languages and semantical rules we look naturally to
the writings of Carnap. His semantical rules take various forms, and

to make my point I shall have to distinguish certain of the forms. Let

us suppose, to begin with, an artificial language L. whose semantical
rules have the form explicitly of a specification, by recursion or other-

wise, of all the analytic statements of L,. The rules tell us that such

and such statements, and only those, are the analytic statements of L,.
Now here the difficulty is simply that the rules contain the word
'analytic', which we do not understand! We understand what expressions the rules attribute analyticity to, but we do not understand what

the rules attribute to those expressions. In short, before we can understand a rule which begins "A statement S is analytic for language Lo
if and only if... ," we must understand the general relative term

'analytic for'; we must understand 'S is analytic for L' where 'S' and
'L' are variables.

Alternatively we may, indeed, view the so-called rule as a conventional definition of a new simple symbol 'analytic-for-LO', which might
better be written untendentiously as 'K' so as not to seem to throw

light on the interesting word 'analytic'. Obviously any number of
classes K, M, N, etc. of statements of Lo can be specified for various
purposes or for no purpose; what does it mean to say that K, as against
M, N, etc., is the class of the "analytic" statements of Lo?

By saying what statements are analytic for Lo we explain 'analytic-

for-L,' but not 'analytic', not 'analytic for'. We do not begin to explain
the idiom 'S is analytic for L' with variable 'S' and 'L', even though we
be content to limit the range of 'L' to the realm of artificial languages.
Actually we do know enough about the intended significance of

'analytic' to know that analytic statements are supposed to be true.

Let us then turn to a second form of semantical rule, which says not

that such and such statements are analytic but simply that such and
such statements are included among the truths. Such a rule is not

subject to the criticism of containing the un-understood word 'analy32

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

tic'; and we may grant for the sake of argument that there is no diffi-

culty over the broader term 'true'. A semantical rule of this second

type, a rule of truth, is not supposed to specify all the truths of the
language; it merely stipulates, recursively or otherwise, a certain

multitude of statements which, along with others unspecified, are to
count as true. Such a rule may be conceded to be quite clear. Derivatively, afterward, analyticity can be demarcated thus: a statement is

analytic if it is (not merely true but) true according to the semantical
rule.

Still there is really no progress. Instead of appealing to an unex-

plained word 'analytic', we are now appealing to an unexplained
phrase 'semantical rule'. Not every true statement which says that

the statements of some class are true can count as a semantical rule otherwise all truths would be "analytic" in the sense of being true
according to semantical rules. Semantical rules are distinguishable,
apparently, only by the fact of appearing on a page under the heading
'Semantical Rules'; and this heading is itself then meaningless.
We can say indeed that a statement is anclytic-for-L0 if and only
if it is true according to such and such specifically appended "seman-

tical rules," but then we find ourselves back at essentially the same
case which was originally discussed: "S is analytic-for-LO if and only

if .... " Once we seek to explain 'S is analytic for L' generally for vari-

able 'L' (even allowing limitation of 'L' to artificial languages), the
explanation 'true according to the semantical rules of L' is unavailing;
for the relative term 'semantical rule of' is as much in need of clarifica-

tion, at least, as 'analytic for'.
It might conceivably be protested that an artificial language L (unlike a natural one) is a language in the ordinary sense plus a set of
explicit semantical rules -the whole constituting, let us say, an or-

dered pair; and that the semantical rules of L then are specifiable simply as the second component of the pair L. But, by the same token and

more simply, we might construe an artificial language L outright as an

ordered pair whose second component is the class of its analytic statements; and then the analytic statements of L become specifiable simply
as the statements in the second component of L. Or better still, we
might just stop tugging at our bootstraps altogether.

Not all the explanations of analyticity known to Carnap and his
readers have been covered explicitly in the above considerations, but
33

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

the extension to other forms is not hard to see. Just one additional
factor should be mentioned which sometimes enters: sometimes the
semantical rules are in effect rules of translation into ordinary language, in which case the analytic statements of the artificial language

are in effect recognized as such from the analyticity of their specified
translations in ordinary language. Here certainly there can be no
thought of an illumination of the problem of analyticity from the side
of the artificial language.

From the point of view of the problem of analyticity the notion of

an artificial language with semantical rules is a feu follet par excellence. Semantical rules determining the analytic statements of an artificial language are of interest only in so far as we already understand
the notion of analyticity; they are of no help in gaining this understanding.

Appeal to hypothetical languages of an artificially simple kind could
conceivably be useful in clarifying analyticity, if the mental or behavioral or cultural factors relevant to analyticity -whatever they
may be-were somehow sketched into the simplified model. But a
model which takes analyticity merely as in irreducible character is
unlikely to throw light on the problem of explicating analyticity.
It is obvious that truth in general depends on both language and
extralinguistic fact. The statement 'Brutus killed Caesar' would be
false if the world had been different in certain ways, but it would also

be false if the word 'killed' happened rather to have the sense of 'begat'.
Hence the temptation to suppose in general that the truth of a statement is somehow analyzable into a linguistic component and a factual
component. Given this supposition, it next seems reasonable that in
some statements the factual component should be null; and these are
the analytic statements. But, for all its a priori reasonableness, a boun-

dary between analytic and synthetic statements simply has not been
drawn. That there is such a distinction to be drawn at all is an un-

empirical dogma of empiricists, a metaphysical article of faith.
V. THE VERIFICATION THEORY AND REDUCTIONISM
In the course of these somber reflections we have taken a dim view
first of the notion of meaning, then of the notion of cognitive synony-

my, and finally of the notion of analyticity. But what, it may be asked,
34

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

of the verification theory of meaning? This phrase has est
self so firmly as a catchword of empiricism that we should be very
unscientific indeed not to look beneath it for a possible key to the
problem of meaning and the associated problems.

The verification theory of meaning, which has been conspicuous in
the literature from Peirce onward, is that the meaning of a statement
is the method of empirically confirming or infirming it. An analytic
statement is that limiting case which is confirmed no matter what.

As urged in Section I, we can as well pass over the question of
meanings as entities and move straight to sameness of meaning, or
synonymy. Then what the verification theory says is that statements
are synonymous if and only if they are alike in point of method of
empirical confirmation or infirmation.

This is an account of cognitive synonymy not of linguistic forms

generally, but of statements.7 However, from the concept of synonymy
of statements we could derive the concept of synonymy for other linguistic forms, by considerations somewhat similar to those at the end
of Section III. Assuming the notion of "word," indeed, we could explain any two forms as synonymous when the putting of the one form

for an occurrence of the other in any statement (apart from occurrences within "words") yields a synonymous statement. Finally, given
the concept of synonymy thus for linguistic forms generally, we could
define analyticity in terms of synonymy and logical truth as in Section
I. For that matter, we could define analyticity more simply in terms of

just synonymy of statements together with logical truth; it is not
necessary to appeal to synonymy of linguistic forms other than state-

ments. For a statement may be described as analytic simply when it
is synonymous with a logically true statement.

So, if the verification theory can be accepted as an adequate account
of statement synonymy, the notion of analyticity is saved after all.

However, let us reflect. Statement synonymy is said to be likeness of
method of empirical confirmation or infirmation. Just what are these

methods which are to be compared for likeness? What, in other words,
'The doctrine can indeed be formulated with terms rather than statements as
the units. Thus C. I. Lewis describes the meaning of a term as "a criterion in
mind, by reference to which one is able to apply or refuse to apply the expression
in question in the case of presented, or imagined, things or situations" (op. cit.,
p. I33).
35

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

is the nature of the relationship between a statement

ences which contribute to or detract from its confirmat

The most naive view of the relationship is that it is

report. This is radical reductionism. Every meaningfu

held to be translatable into a statement (true or false) abo

experience. Radical reductionism, in one form or anot

dates the verification theory of meaning explicitly so

Locke and Hume held that every idea must either origina

sense experience or else be compounded of ideas thus o

taking a hint from Tooke8 we might rephrase this doc

tical jargon by saying that a term, to be significant a

either a name of a sense datum or a compound of such
abbreviation of such a compound. So stated, the doct
ambiguous as between sense data as sensory events and

sensory qualities; and it remains vague as to the adm
compounding. Moreover, the doctrine is unnecessarily

restrictive in the term-by-term critique which it imp

sonably, and without yet exceeding the limits of wha
radical reductionism, we may take full statements as
units - thus demanding that our statements as wholes

into sense-datum language, but not that they be trans
term.

This emendation would unquestionably have been we

and Hume and Tooke, but historically it had to await two

developments. One of these developments was the incr
on verification or confirmation, which came with the explicitly so-

called verification theory of meaning. The objects of verification or
confirmation being statements, this emphasis gave the statement -an
ascendency over the word or term as unit of significant discourse. The

other development, consequent upon the first, was Russell's discovery
of the concept of incomplete symbols defined in use.

Radical reductionism, conceived now with statements as units, sets
itself the task of specifying a sense-datum language and showing how
to translate the rest of significant discourse, statement by statement,
into it. Carnap embarked on this project in the Aufbau.9
8John Horne Tooke, The Diversions of Purley (London, I776; Boston, i8o6),
I, ch. ii.

9R. Carnap, Der logische Aufbau der Welt (Berlin, I928).
36

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

The language which Carnap adopted as his starting point was not
a sense-datum language in the narrowest conceivable sense, for it in-

cluded also the notations of logic, up through higher set theory. In
effect it included the whole language of pure mathematics. The ontology implicit in it (i.e., the range of values of its variables) embraced
not only sensory events but classes, classes of classes, and so on. Empiricists there are who would boggle at such prodigality. Carnap's

starting point is very parsimonious, however, in its extralogical or
sensory part. In a series of constructions in which he exploits the re-

sources of modern logic with much ingenuity, he succeeds in defining

a wide array of important additional sensory concepts which, but for
his constructions, one would not have dreamed were definable on so

slender a basis. Carnap was the first empiricist who, not content with
asserting the reducibility of science to terms of immediate experience,

took serious steps toward carrying out the reduction.
Even supposing Carnap's starting point satisfactory, his construc-

tions were, as he himself stressed, only a fragment of the full program.

The construction of even the simplest statements about the physical

world was left in a sketchy state. Carnap's suggestions on this subject
were, despite their sketchiness, very suggestive. He explained spatiotemporal point-instants as quadruples of real numbers and envisaged
assignment of sense qualities to point-instants according to certain

canons. Roughly summarized, the plan was that qualities should be
assigned to point-instants in such a way as to achieve the laziest world

compatible with our experience. The principle of least action was to be

our guide in constructing a world from experience.
Carnap did not seem to recognize, however, that his treatment of
physical objects fell short of reduction not merely through sketchiness,

but in principle. Statements of the form 'Quality q is at point-instant

x; y; z; t' were, according to his canons, to be apportioned truth values in such a way as to maximize and minimize certain over-all features, and with growth of experience the truth values were to be

progressively revised in the same spirit. I think this is a good schematization (deliberately oversimplified, to be sure) of what science really
does; but it provides no indication, not even the sketchiest, of how a

statement of the form 'Quality q is at x; y; z; t' could ever be translated into Carnap's initial language of sense data and logic. The con37

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

nective 'is at' remains an added undefined connective; the canons
counsel us in its use but not in its elimination.

Carnap seems to have appreciated this point afterward; for in his
later writings he abandoned all notion of the translatability of state-

ments about the physical world into statements about immediate experience. Reductionism in its radical form has long since ceased to
figure in Carnap's philosophy.

But the dogma of reductionism has, in a subtler and more tenuous

form, continued to influence the thought of empiricists. The notion
lingers that to each statement, or each synthetic statement, there is
associated a unique range of possible sensory events such that the
occurrence of any of them would add to the likelihood of truth of the
statement, and that there is associated also another unique range of

possible sensory events whose occurrence would detract from that
likelihood. This notion is of course implicit in the verification theory
of meaning.

The dogma of reductionism survives in the supposition that each
statement, taken in isolation from its fellows, can admit of confirmation

or infirmation at all. My countersuggestion, issuing essentially from
Carnap's doctrine of the physical world in the Aufbau, is that our
statements about the external world face the tribunal of sense experience not individually but only as a corporate body.
The dogma of reductionism, even in its attenuated form, is intimately connected with the other dogma: that there is a cleavage between

the analytic and the synthetic. We have found ourselves led, indeed,
from the latter problem to the former through the verification theory
of meaning. More directly, the one dogma clearly supports the other in

this way: as long as it is taken to be significant in general to speak of
the confirmation and infirmation of a statement, it seems significant to

speak also of a limiting kind of statement which is vacuously confirmed, ipso facto, come what may; and such a statement is analytic.
The two dogmas are, indeed, at root identical. We lately reflected

that in general the truth of statements does obviously depend both
upon language and upon extralinguistic fact; and we noted that this
obvious circumstance carries in its train, not logically but all too nat-

urally, a feeling that the truth of a statement Is somehow analyzable
into a linguistic component and a factual component. The factual component must, if we are empiricists, boil down to a range of confirma38

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

tory experiences. In the extreme case where the linguistic component
is all that matters, a true statement is analytic. But I hope we are now
impressed with how stubbornly the distinction between analytic and
synthetic has resisted any straightforward drawing. I am impressed

also, apart from prefabricated examples of black and white balls in an
urn, with how baffling the problem has always been of arriving at any
explicit theory of the empirical confirmation of a synthetic statement.
My present suggestion is that it is nonsense, and the root of much
nonsense, to speak of a linguistic component and a factual component
in the truth of any individual statement. Taken collectively, science

has its double dependence upon language and experience; but this
duality is not significantly traceable into the statements of science
taken one by one.

Russell's concept of definition in use was, as remarked, an advance

over the impossible term-by-term empiricism of Locke and Hume.
The statement, rather than the term, came with Russell to be recog-

nized as the unit accountable to an empiricist critique. But what I am
now urging is that even in taking the statement as unit we have drawn

our grid too finely. The unit of empirical significance is the whole of
science.

VI. EMPIRICISM WITHOUT THE DOGMAS
The totality of our so-called knowledge or beliefs, from the most
casual matters of geography and history to the profoundest laws of

atomic physics or even of pure mathematics and logic, is a man-made

fabric which impinges on experience only along the edges. Or, to
change the figure, total science is like a field of force whose boundary

conditions are experience. A conflict with experience at the periphery
occasions readjustments in the interior of the field. Truth values have
to be redistributed over some of our statements. Re-evaluation of some
statements entails re-evaluation of others, because of their logical
interconnections - the logical laws being in turn simply certain fur-

ther statements of the system, certain further elements of the field.
Having re-evaluated one statement we must re-evaluate some others,

whether they be statements logically connected with the first or whether they be the statements of logical connections themselves. But the
total field is so undetermined by its boundary conditions, experience,
that there is much latitude of choice as to what statements to re39

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

evaluate in the light of any single contrary experience. No particular
experiences are linked with any particular statements in the interior

of the field, except indirectly through considerations of equilibrium
affecting the field as a whole.
If this view is right, it is misleading to speak of the empirical content of an individual statement - especially if it be a statement at all

remote from the experiential periphery of the field. Furthermore it
becomes folly to seek a boundary between synthetic statements, which

hold contingently on experience, and analytic statements which hold
come what may. Any statement can be held true come what may, if
we make drastic enough adjustments elsewhere in the system. Even a

statement very close to the periphery can be held true in the face of
recalcitrant experience by pleading hallucination or by amending cer-

tain statements of the kind called logical laws. Conversely, by the same

token, no statement is immune to revision. Revision even of the logical law of the excluded middle has been proposed as a means of simplifying quantum mechanics; and what difference is there in principle

between such a shift and the shift whereby Kepler superseded Ptolemy,
or Einstein Newton, or Darwin Aristotle?
For vividness I have been speaking in terms of varying distances
from a sensory periphery. Let me try now to clarify this notion with-

out metaphor. Certain statements, though about physical objects and
not sense experience, seem peculiarly germane to sense experience and in a selective way: some statements to some experiences, others
to others. Such statements, especially germane to particular experi-

ences, I picture as near the periphery. But in this relation of "ger-

maneness" I envisage nothing more than a loose association reflecting
the relative likelihood, in practice, of our choosing one statement

rather than another for revision in the event of recalcitrant experience
For example, we can imagine recalcitrant experiences to which we

would surely be inclined to accommodate our system by re-evaluating
just the statement that there are brick houses on Elm Street, together
with related statements on the same topic. We can imagine other re-

calcitrant experiences to which we would be inclined to accommodate
our system by re-evaluating just the statement that there are no cen-

taurs, along with kindred statements. A recalcitrant experience can, I
have already urged, be accommodated by any of various alternative
re-evaluations in various alternative quarters of the total system; but,
40

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

in the cases which we are now imagining, our natural tendency to
disturb the total system as little as possible would lead us to focus our
revisions upon these specific statements concerning brick houses or
centaurs. These statements are felt, therefore, to have a sharper empirical reference than highly theoretical statements of physics or logic or
ontology. The latter statements may be thought of as relatively centrally located within the total network, meaning merely that little preferential connection with any particular sense data obtrudes itself.
As an empiricist I continue to think of the conceptual scheme of
science as a tool, ultimately, for predicting future experience in the
light of past experience. Physical objects are conceptually imported
into the situation as convenient intermediaries - not by definition in
terms of experience, but simply as irreducible posits comparable,
epistemologically, to the gods of Homer. Let me interject that for my
part I do, qua lay physicist, believe in physical objects and not in
Homer's gods; and I consider it a scientific error to believe otherwise.
But in point of epistemological footing the physical objects and the
gods differ only in degree and not in kind. Both sorts of entities enter
our conception only as cultural posits. The myth of physical objects
is epistemologically superior to most in that it has proved more efficacious than other myths as a device for working a manageable structure into the flux of experience.

Imagine, for the sake of analogy, that we are given the rational
numbers. We develop an algebraic theory for reasoning about them,
but we find it inconveniently complex, because certain functions such
as square root lack values for some arguments. Then it is discovered

that the rules of our algebra can be much simplified by conceptually
augmenting our ontology with some mythical entities, to be called irrational numbers. All we continue to be really interested in, first and
last, are rational numbers; but we find that we can commonly get from

one law about rational numbers to another much more quickly and
simply by pretending that the irrational numbers are there too.
I think this a fair account of the introduction of irrational numbers
and other extensions of the number system. The fact that the mythical
status of irrational numbers eventually gave way to the DedekindRussell version of them as certain infinite classes of ratios is irrelevant

to my analogy. That version is impossible anyway as long as reality is
limited to the rational numbers and not extended to classes of them.
4I

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW

Now I suggest that experience is analogous to the rational numbers and that the physical objects, in analogy to the irrational numbers,
are posits which serve merely to simplify our treatment of experience.
The physical objects are no more reducible to experience than the
irrational numbers to rational numbers, but their incorporation into
the theory enables us to get more easily from one statement about
experience to another.
The salient differences between the positing of physical objects and
the positing of irrational numbers are, I think, just two. First, the
factor of simplification is more overwhelming in the case of physical

objects than in the numerical case. Second, the positing of physical

objects is far more archaic, being indeed coeval, I expect, with language itself. For language is social and so depends for its development
upon intersubjective reference.

Positing does not stop with macroscopic physical objects. Objects at
the atomic level and beyond are posited to make the laws of macro-

scopic objects, and ultimately the laws of experience, simpler and more
manageable; and we need not expect or demand full definition of
atomic and subatomic entities in terms of macroscopic ones, any more
than definition of macroscopic things in terms of sense data. Science

is a continuation of common sense, and it continues the common-sense

expedient of swelling ontology to simplify theory.
Physical objects, small and large, are not the only posits. Forces

are another example; and indeed we are told nowadays that the boun-

dary between energy and matter is obsolete. Moreover, the abstract
entities which are the substance of mathematics - ultimately classes
and classes of classes and so on up -are another posit in the same

spirit. Epistemologically these are myths on the same footing with
physical objects and gods, neither better nor worse except for differences in the degree to which they expedite our dealings with sense
experiences.

The over-all algebra of rational and irrational numbers is underdetermined by the algebra of rational numbers, but is smoother and
more convenient; and it includes the algebra of rational numbers as a

jagged or gerrymandered part. Total science, mathematical and natural and human, is similarly but more extremely underdetermined by
experience. The edge of the system must bVe kept squared with experience; the rest, with all its elaborate myths or fictions, has as its objective the simplicity of laws.
42

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

MAIN TRENDS IN RECENT PHILOSOPHY

Ontological questions, under this view, are on a par with questions
of natural science. Consider the question whether to countenance

classes as entities. This, as I have argued 'elsewhere,10 is the question
whether to quantify with respect to variables which take classes as
values. Now Carnap has maintained" that this is a question not of
matters of fact but of choosing a convenient language form, a con-

venient conceptual scheme or framework for science. With this I
agree, but only on the proviso that the same be conceded regarding

scientific hypotheses generally. Carnap has recognized2 that he is able
to preserve a double standard for ontological questions and scientific
hypotheses only by assuming an absolute distinction between the analytic and the synthetic; and I need not say again that this is a distinc.tion which I reject.

Some issues do, I grant, seem more a question of convenient conceptual scheme and others more a question of brute fact. The issue
over there being classes seems more a question of convenient conceptual scheme; the issue over there being centaurs, or brick houses on
Elm Street, seems more a question of fact. But I have been urging

that this difference is only one of degree, and that it turns upon our
vaguely pragmatic inclination to adjust one strand of the fabric of
science rather than another in accommodating some particular recal-

citrant experience. Conservatism figures in such choices, and so does
the quest for simplicity.

Carnap, Lewis, and others take a pragmatic stand on the question
of choosing between language forms, scientific frameworks; but their
pragmatism leaves off at the imagined boundary between the analytic

and the synthetic. In repudiating such a boundary I espouse a more

thorough pragmatism. Each man is given a scientific heritage plus a
continuing barrage of sensory stimulation; and the considerations

which guide him in warping his scientific heritage to fit his continuing
sensory promptings are, where rational, pragmatic.
W. V. QUINE

Harvard University

10 E.g., in "Notes on Existence and Necessity," Journal of Philosophy, XL
(I943), I3-I27.

" Carnap, "Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology," Revue
philosophies IV (0950), 20-40.
12 Op. cit., p. 32, footnote.

43

This content downloaded from 144.174.212.34 on Thu, 11 Apr 2019 12:15:43 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

