On Referring
P. F. Strawson
Mind, New Series, Vol. 59, No. 235. (Jul., 1950), pp. 320-344.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0026-4423%28195007%292%3A59%3A235%3C320%3AOR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
Mind is currently published by Oxford University Press.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/oup.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

http://www.jstor.org
Fri Oct 26 13:47:56 2007

111.-ON

REFERRING 


WE very commonly use expressions of certain kinds to mention
or refer to some individual person or single object or particular
event or place or process, in the course of doing what we should
normally describe as making a statement about that person, object,
place, event, or process. I shall call this way of using expressions
the "uniquely referring use". The classes of expressions which are
most commonly used in this way are : singular demonstrative
pronouns (" this " and " that ") ; proper names (e.g. " Venice ",
" Napoleon ", " John ") ; singular personal and impersonal
pronouns (" he ", " she ", " I ", " you ", " it ") ; and phrases
beginning with the definite articlefollowed by a noun, qualified or
unqualified, in the singular (e.g. " the table", " the old man ",
"the king of France"). Any expression of any of these classes can
occur as the subject of what would traditionally be regarded as a
singular subject-predicate sentence ; and would, so occurring,
exemplify the use I wish to discuss.
I do not want to say that expressions belonging to these classes
never have any other use than the one I want to discuss. On the
contrary, it is obvious that they do. It is obvious that anyone who
uttered the sentence, "The whale is a mammal~',wouldbe using the
expression " the whale " in a way quite different from the way it
would be used by anyone who had occasion seriously to utter the
sentence, "The whale struck the ship". In the first sentence one is
obviously not mentioning, and in the second sentence one obviously
is mentioning, a particular whale. Againif I said, "Napoleon was
the greatest French soldier ", I should be using the word
" Napoleon " to mention a certain individual, but I should not be
using the phrase, " the greatest French soldier ", to mention an
individual, but to say something about an individual I had already
mentioned. It would be natural to say that in using this sentence
I was talking about Napoleon and that what Iwas saying about him
was that he was the greatest French soldier. But of course I could
use the expression, " the greatest French soldier ", to mention an
individual; for example, by saying: "The greatest French soldier
died in exile". So it is obvious that at least some expressions belonging to the classes I mentioned can have uses other than the

.

P. F. STRAWSON

: ON REFERRING

321

use I am anxious to discuss. Another thing" I do not want to
say is that in any given sentence there is never more than one
expression used in the way I propose to discuss. On the contrary,
it is obvious that there may be more than one. For example,
it would be natural to say that, in seriously using the sentence,
" The whale struck the ship ", I was saying something about
both a certain whale and a certain ship, that I was using each of
the expressions "the whale " and " the ship " to mention a particular object ; or, in other words, that I was using each of these
expressions in the uniquely referring way. In general, however,
I shall confine my attention to cases where an expression used in
this way occurs as the grammatical subject of a sentence.
I think it is true to say that Russell's Theory of Descriptions,
which is concerned with the last of the four classes of expressions
I mentioned above (i.e. with expressions of the form " the so-andso ") is still widely accepted among logicians as giving a correct
account of the use of such expressions in ordinary language.
I want to show, in the first place, that this theory, so regarded,
embodies some fundamental mistakes.
What question or questions about phrases of the form "the
so-and-so " was the Theory of Descriptions designed to answer ?
I think that at least one of the questions may 'be illustrated as
follows. Suppose some one were now to utter the sentence, "The
king of France is wise ". No one would say that the sentence
which had been uttered was meaningless. Everyone would agree
that it was significant. But everyone knows that there is not at
present a king of France. One of the questions the Theory of
Descriptions was designed to answer was the question : how can
such a sentence as " The king of France is wise " be significant
even when there is nothing which answers to the description it
contains, i.e., in this case, nothing which answers to the description " The king of France " ? And one of the reasons why
Russell thought it important to give a correct answer to this
question was that he thought it important to show that another
answer which might be given was wrong. The answer that he
thought was wrong, and to which he was anxious to supply an
alternative, might be exhibited as the conclusion of either of the
following two fallacious arguments. Let us call the sentence
" The king of France is wise " the sentence S. Then the first
argument is as follows :
(1) The phrase, " the king of France ", is the subject of the
sentence S.
Therefore (2) if S is a significant sentence, S is a sentence about
the king of France.

322

P. F. STRAWSON

:

But (3) if there in no sense exists a king of France, the sentence
is not about anything, and hence not about the king of Prance.
Therefore (4) since S is significant, there must in some sense
(in spme world) exist (or subsist) the king of France.
And the second argument is as follows :
(1) If S is significant, it is either true or false.
(2) S is true if the king of France is wise and false if the king
of Prance is not wise.
(3) But the statement that the king of France is wise and the
statement that the king of France is not wise are alike true only
if there is (in some sense, in some world) something which is the
king of France.
Hence (4) since S is significant, there follows the same conclusion
as before.
These are fairly obviously bad arguments, and,,as we should
expect, Russell rejects them. The postulation of a world of
strange entities, to which the king of France belongs, offends, he
says, against ('that feeling for reality which ought to be preserved
even in the most abstract studies ". The fact that Russell rejects
these arguments. is, however, less interesting than the extent to
which, in rejecting their conclusion, he concedes the more important of their principles. Let me refer to the phrase, "the
king of Prance ", as the phrase D. Then I think Russell's reasons
for rejecting these two arguments can be summarised as follows.
The mistake arises, he says, from thinking that D, which is certainly the gmmmaticak subject of S, is also the logical subject of S.
But D is not the logical subject of S. In fact S, although grammatically it has a si.ngular subject and a predicate, is not logically
a subject-predicate sentence at all. The proposition it expresses
is a complex kind of existeritial proposition, part of which might
be described as a "uniquely existential" proposition. To
exhibit the logical form of the proposition, we should re-write the
sentence in a logically appropriate grammatical form ; in such
a way that the deceptive similarity of S to a sentence expressing
a subject-predicate proposition would disappear, and we should
be safeguarded against arguments such as the bad ones I outlined
above. Before recalling the details of Russell's analysis of S, let
us notice what his answer, as I have so far given it, seems to imply.
His answer seems to imply that in the case of a sentence which
is similar to S in that (1) it is grammatically of the subjectpredicate form and (2) its grammatical subject does not refer to
anything, then the only alternative to its being meaningless is that
it should not really (i.e. logically) be of the subject-predicate form

OX REFERRING

323

at all, but of some quite different form. And this in its turn seems
to imply that if there are any sentences which are genuinel?
of the subject-predicate form, then the very fact of their being
significant, having a meaning, guarantees that there i s something
referred to by the logical (and grammatical) subject. AIoreover,
Russell's ansn-er seems to imply that there are such sentences.
For if it is true that one may be misled by the grammatical similarity of S to other sentences into thinking that it is logically of
the subject-predicate form, then surely there must be other
sentences grammatically similar to S, which are of the subjectpredicate form. To show not only that Russell's answer seems
to imply these conclusions, but that he accepted at least the first
two of them, it is enough to consider what he saps about a class
of expressions which he calls " logically proper names " and contrasts with expressions, like D, which he calls " definite descriptions ". Of logically proper names Russell says or implies
the follon-ing things :
(1) That they and they alone can occur as subjects of sentences
which are genuinely of the subject-predic,at e f orm :
(2) that an expression intended to be a logically proper name
is meaningless unless there is some single object for which it
stands : for the meaning of such an expression just is the individual
object n-hich the expression designates. To be a name at all,
therefore, it must designate something.
It is easy to see that if anyone believes these two propositions, then
the only way for him to save the significance of the sentence
S is to deny that it is a logically subject-predicate sentence.
Generally, we may say that Russell recognises only txo ways in
which sentences which seen:, from their grammatical structure, to
be about some particular person or indil-idual object or event, can
be significant :
(1) The first is that their grammatical form should be misleading
as to their logical form, and that they should be analysable,
like S, as a special kind of existential sentence ;
(2) The second is that their grammatical subject should be a
logically proper name, of which the meaning is the individual
thing it designates.

I think that Russell is unquestionably wrong in this, and that
sentences which are significant, and which begin with an expression
used in the uniquely referring way fall into neither of these two
classes. Expressions used in the uniquely referring may are never
either logically proper names or descriptions, if what is meant by
calling them " descriptions " is that they are to be analysed in

324

P. F. STRAWSON

:

accordance with the model provided by Russell's Theory of
Descriptions.
There are no logically proper names and there are no descriptions
(in this sense).
Let us now consider the details of Russell's analysis. According
to Russell, anyone who asserted S would be asserting that :
(1) There is a king of France.
(2) There is not more than one king of France.
(3) There is nothing which is king of France and is not wise.
I t is easy to see both how Russell arrived at this analysis, and how
it enables him to answer the question with which we began, viz.
the question : How can the sentence S be significant when there
is no king of France ? The way in which he arrived at the analysis
was clearly by asking himself what would be the circumstances in
which we would say that anyone who uttered the sentence S had
made a true assertion. And it does seem pretty clear, and I
have no wish to dispute, that the sentences (1)-(3) above do
describe circumstances which are at least necessary conditions of
anyone making a true assertion by uttering the sentence S. But,
as I hope to show, to say this is not at all the same thing as to say
that Russell has given a correct account of the use of the sentence
S or even that he has given an account which, though incomplete,
is correct as far as it goes ; and is certainly not a t all the same thing
as to say that the model translation provided is a correct model
for all (or for any) singular sentences beginning with a phrase of
the form " the so-and-so ".
It is also easy to see how this analysis enables Russell to answer
the question of how the sentence S can be significant, even when
there is no king of France, For, if this analysis is correct, anyone
who utters the sentence S to-day would be jointly asserting
three propositions, one of which (viz. that there is a king of France)
would be false ; and since the conjunction of three propositions,
of which one is false. is itself false. the assertion as a whole would'
be significant, but false. So neither of the bad arguments for
subsistent entities would apply to such an assertion.

As a step towards showing that Russell's solation of his problem
is mistaken, and towards providing the correct solution, I want
now to draw certain distinctions. For this purpose I shall, for the
remainder of thissection,refer to an expressionwhichhas a uniquely
referring use as " an expression " for short ; and to a sentence

ON REFERRING

325

beginning with such an expression as " a sentence " for short.
The distinctions I shall draw are rather rough and ready, and,
no doubt, difficult cases could be produced which would call for
their refinement. But I think they will serve my purpose. The
distinctions are between :
(Al) a sentence,
(A2) a use of a sentence,
(A3) an utterance of a sentence,
and, correspondingly, between :
(Bl) an expression,
(B2) a use of an expression,
(B3) an utterance of an expression.
Consider again the sentence, " The king of Prance is wise ". It
is easy to imagine that this sentence was uttered at various times
from, say, the beginning of the seventeenth century onwards,
during the reigns of each successive French monarch ; and easy
to imagine that it was also uttered during the subsequent periods
in which France was not a monarchy. Notice that it was natural
for me to speak of "the sentence " or "this sentence " being
uttered at various times during this period ; or, in other words,
that it would be natural and correct to speak of one and the same
sentence being uttered on all these various occasions. It is in
the sense in which it would be correct to speak of one and the
same sentence being uttered on all these vaGous occasions that I
want to use the expression (Al) " a sentence". There are, however. obvious differences betxeen different occasions o f the use
of this sentence. For instance, if one man uttered it in the reign
of Louis XIV and another man uttered it in the reign of Louis XV,
that they were respectively
it would be natural to say (to ass~~me)
talking about different people; and it might be held that the
first man, in using the sentence, made a true assertion, while the
second man, in using the same sentence, made a false assertion.
If on the other hand two different men simultaneously uttered the
sentence (e.g. if one wrote it and the other spoke it) during the reign
of Louis XIV, it would be natural to say (assume) that they were
both talking about the same person, and, in that case, in using the
sentence. thev
,. must either both have made a true assertion or both
have made a false assertion. And this illustrates what I mean by
a .use of a sentence. The tmo men who uttered the sentence, one
in the reign of Louis XV and one in the reign of Louis XIV, each
made a Sfferent use of the same sentence : -whereas the two men
who uttered the sentence simultaneously inthe reign of Louis XIV,
2


326

P. F. STRAWSON :

made the same use of the same sentence. Obviously in the case
of this sentence, and equally obviously in the case of many others,
we cannot talk of the sentence being true or false, but only of its
being used to make a true or false assertion, or (if this is preferred)
to express a true or a false proposition. And equally obviously we
cannot talk of the sentence being about a particular person, for the
same sentence may be used a t different times to talk about quite
different particular persons, but only of a use of the sentence to talk
about a particular person. Finally it will make sufficiently clear
what I mean by an utterance of a sentence if I say that the two
men who simultaneously uttered the sentence in the reign of Louis
XIV made two different utterances of the same sentence, though
they made the same use of the sentence.
If we now consider not the whole sentence, " The king of Prance
is wise ", but that part of it which is the expression, "the king
of fiance ", it is obvious that we can make analogous, though not
identical distinctions between (1)the expression, (2) a use of the
expression and (3) an utterance of the expression. The distinctions will not be identical ; we obviously cannot correctly
talk of the expression " the king of France " being used to express
a true or false proposition, since in general only sentences can
be used truly or falsely ; and similarly it is only by using a sentence
and not by using an expression alone, that you can talk about
a particular person. Instead, we shall say in this case that
you use the expression to mention or refir t o a particular person
in the course of using the sentence to talk about him. But obviously in this case, and a great many others, the expression
(Bl) cannot be said to mention, or refer to, anything, any more
than the sentence can be said to be true or false. The same
expression can have different mentioning-uses, as the same
sentence can be used to make statements with different truthvalues. " Mentioning ", or " referring ", is not something an
expression does ; it is something that some one can use an expression to do. Mentioning, or referring to, something is a
characteristic of a use of an expression, just as " being about "
something, and truth-or-falsity, are characteristics of a use of a
sentence.
A very different example may help to make these distinctions
clearer. Consider another case of an expression which has a
This usage of ' use ' is, of course, different from (a) the current usage
in which ' use ' (of a particular word, phrase, sentence) = (roughly) ' rules
for using ' = (roughly) ' meaning ' ; and from (b) my own usage in the
phrase " uniquely referring use of expressions " in which ' use ' =
(roughly) ' way of using '.

ON REFERRING

327

uniquely referring use, viz. the expression " I " ; and consider
the sentence, " I am hot ". Countless people may use this same
sentence ; but it is logically impossible for two different people
to make the same use of this sentence : or, if this is preferred,
to use it to express the same proposition. The expression " I "
may correctly be used by (and only by) any one of innumerable
people to refer to himself. To say this is to say something
about the expression " I " : it is, in a sense, to give its meaning.
This is the sort of thing that can be said about expressions. But
it makes no sense to say of the expression " I " that it refers
to a particular person. This is the sort of thing that can be said
only cf a particular use of the expression.
Let me use "type " as an abbreviation for " sentence or
expression ". Then I am not saying that there are sentences and
expression (types), and uses of them, and utterances of them, as
there are ships and shoes and sealing-wax. I am saying that we
cannot say the same things about types, uses of types, and utterances
of types. And the fact is that we do talk about types ; and that
confusion is apt to result from the failure to notice the differences
between what we can say about these and what we can say
only about the uses of types. We are apt to fancy we are talking
about sentences and expressions when we are talking about the
uses of sentences and expressions.
This is what Russell does. Generally, as against Russell, I
shall say this. Meaning (in at least one important sense) is
a function of the sentence or expression ; mentioning and referring
and truth or falsity, are functions of the use of the sentence or
expression. To give the meaning of an expression (in the sense
in which I am using the word) is to give general directions for its
use to refer to or mention particular objects or persons ; to give
the meaning of a sentence is to give general directions for its use
in making true or false assertions. I t is not to talk about any
particular occasion of the use of the sentence or expression. The
meaning of an expression cannot be identified with the object it
is used, on a particular occasion, to refer to. The meaning of
. a sentence cannot be identified with the assertion it is used, on
a particular occasion, to make. For to talk about the meaning of
a n expression or sentence is not to talk about its use on a particular occasion, but about the rules, habits, conventions governing
its correct use, on all occasions, to refer or to assert. So the question of whether a sentence or expression is signijicant or not
has nothing whatever to do with the question of whether the
sentence, uttered on a particular occasion, is, on that occasion,
being used to make a true-or-false assertion or not, or of whether

328 	

P. F. STRAWSON

:

the expression is, on that occasion, being used to refer to, or
mention, anything at all.
The source of Russell's mistake was that he thought that referring or mentioning, if it occurred at all, must be meaning. He
did not distinguish B1 from B2 ; he confused expressions with
their use in a particular context ; and so confused meaning with
mentioning, with referring. If I talk about my handkerchief,
I can, perhaps, produce the object I am referring to out of my
pocket. I can't produce the meaning of the expression, "my
handkerchief ", out of my pocket. Because Russell confused
meaning with mentioning, he thought that if there were any
expressions having a uniquely referring use, which were what they
seemed (i.e. logical subjects) and not something else in disguise,
their meaning must be the particular object which they were used
to refer to. Hence the troublesome mythology of the logically
proper name. But if some one asks me the meaning of the expression " this "-once
Russell's favourite candidate for this
status-I do not hand him the object I have just used the expression to refer to, adding at the same time that the meaning
of the word changes every time it is used. Nor do I hand him all
the objects it ever has been, or might be, used to refer to. I
explain and illustrate the conventions governrng the use of the
expression. This i s giving the meaning of the expression. I t is
quite different from giving (in any sense of giving) the object
to which it refers ; for the expression itself does not refer to
anything ; though it can be used, on different occasions, to refer
to innumerable things. Now as a mattel of fact there is, in
, 	 English, a sense of the word " mean " in which this word does
approximate to " indicate, mention or refer to " ; e.g. when
somebody (unpleasantly) says, " I mean you " ; or when I point
and say, " That's the one I mean ". But the one I meant is
quite different from the meaning of the e x p ~ e s s i mI used to talk of it.
In this special sense of " mean ". it is people who mean, not expressions. People use expressions to refer to particular things.
Rut the meaning of an expression is not the set of things or the
single thing it may correctly be used to refer to : the meaning is
the set of rules, habits, conventions for its use in referring.
It is the same with sentences : even more obviously so. Every
one knows that the sentence, " The table is covered with books ",
is significant, and every one knows what it means. But if I ask,
" What object is that sentence about ? " I am asking an absurd
question-a question which cannot be asked about the sentence,
but only about some use of the sentence : and in this case the
sentence hasn't been used, it has only been taken as an example.

ON REFERRING

329

In knowing what it means, you are knowing how it could correctly
be used to talk about things : so knowing the meaning hasn't
anything to do with knowing about any particular use of the
sentence to talk about anything. Similarly, if I ask : " Is the
sentence true or false ? " I am asking an absurd question,
which becomes no less absurd if I add, " I t must be one or the
other since it's significant ". The question is absurd, because the
sentence is neither true nor false any more than it's about some
object. Of course the fact that it's significant is the same as the
fact that it carz correctly be used to talk about something and that,
in so using it, some one will be making a true or false assertion.
And I will add that it will be used to make a. true or false assertion
only if the person using it i s talking about something. If, when
he utters it, he is not talking about anything, then his use is not
a genuine one, but a spurious or pseudo-use : he is not making
either a true or a false assertion, though he may think he is. And
this points the way to the correct answer to the puzzle to which
the Theory of Descriptions gives a fatally incorrect answer. The
important point is that the question of whether the sentence is
significant or not is quite independent of the question that can
be raised about a particular use of it, viz. the question whether
it is a genuine or a spurious use, whether it is being used to talk
about something, or in make-believe, or as an example in philosophy. The question whether the sentence is significant or not is
the question whether there exist such language habits, conventions
or rules that the sentence logically could be used to talk about
something ; and is hence quite independent of the question
whether it is being so used on a particular occasion.

Consider again the sentence, " The king of France is wise ",
and the true and false things Russell says about it.
There are at least two true things which Russell would say
about the sentence :
(1) The first is that it is significant ; that if anyone were now
to utter it, he would be uttering a significant sentence.
(2) The second is that anyone now uttering the sentence would
be making a true assertion only if there in fact a t present existed
one and only one king of France, and if he were wise.
What are the false things which Russell would say about the
sentence ? Thev are :
(1) That anyone now uttering it would be making a true assertion or a false assertion ;

330

P. F. STRAWSON

:

(2) That part of what he would be asserting would be that
there at present existed one and only one king of France.
I have already given some reasons for thinking that these two
statements are incorrect. Now suppose some one were in fact to
say to you with a perfectly serious air : " The king of France is
wise ". Would you say, " That's untrue " ? I think it's quite
certain that you wouldn't. But suppose he went on to ask you
whether you thought that what he had just said mas true, or was
false ; whether you agreed or disagreed with what he had just
said. I think you would be inclined, with some hesitation, to
say that you didn't do either ; that the question of whether his
statement was true or false simply didn't arise, because there was
no such person as the king of France.l You might, if he were
obviously serious (had a dazed astray-in-the-centuries look),
say something like : " I'm afraid you must be under a misapprehension. France is not a monarchy. There is no king
of France." And this brings out the point that if a man seriously
uttered the sentence, his uttering it would in some sense be
evidence that he believed that there was a king of France. It would
not be evidence for his believing this simply in the way in which a
man's reaching for his raincoat is evidence for his believing that it
is raining. But nor would it be evidence for his believing this
in the way in which a man's saying, " It's raining " is evidence
for his believing that it is raining. We might put it as follows.
To say, " The king of France is wise " is, in some sense of " imply ",
to imply that there is a king of France. But this is a very special
and odd sense of " imply ". " Implies " in this sense is certainly
not equivalent to " entails " (or " logically implies "). And
this comes out from the facf that when, in response to his statement, we say (as we should) " There is no king of France ", we
should certainly not say we were contradicting the statement that
the king of Brance is wise. We are certainly not saying that it's
false. We are, rather, giving a reason for saying that the question
of whether it's true or false simply doesn't arise.
And this is where the distinction I drew earlier can help us.
The sentence, " The king of France is wise ", is certainly signscant ; but this does not mean that any particular use of it is
true or false. We use it truly or falsely when me use it to talk
about some one ; when, in using the expression, " The king of
France ", we are in fact mentioning some one. The fact that the
sentence and the expression, ~espectively,are significant just is the
fact that the sentence could be used, in certain circumstances, to
Since this article was written, there has appeared a clear statement
of this point by Mr Geach in Analysis Vol. 10, No. 4, March, 1950.

ON REFERRING

331

say something true or false, that the expression,could be used, in
certain circumstances to mention a particular person ; and to
know their meaning is to know what sort of circumstances these
are. So when we utter the sentence without in fact mentioning
anybody by the use of the phrase, " The king of France ", the
sentence doesn't cease to be significant : we simply fail to say
anything true or false because we simply fail to mention anybody
by this particular use of that perfectly significant phrase. It is,
if you like, a spurious use of the sentence, and a spurious use of the
expression ; though we may (or may not) mistakenly think it a
genuine use.
And such spurious uses are very fami1ia.r. Sophisticated
romancing, sophisticated fiction,l depend upon them. If I began,
"The king of France is wise ",and went on, "and he lives in a golden
castle and has a hundred wives", and so on, a hearer would understand me perfectly well, without supposing either that I was talking
about a particular person, or that I was making a false statement
to the effect that there existed such a person as my words described. (It is worth adding that where the use of sentences and
expressions is overtly fictional, the sense of the word " about "
may change. As Moore said, it is perfectly natural and correct
to say that some of the statements in Pickwick Papers are about
Mr. Pickwick. But where the use of sentences and expressions
is not overtly fictional, this use of " about " seems less correct ;
i.e. it would not in general be correct to say that a statement was
about Mr. X or the so-and-so, unless there were such a person or
thing. So it is where the romancing is in danger of being taken
seriously that we might answer the question, " Who is he talking
about ? " with " He's not talking about anybody " ; but, in
saying this, we are not saying that what he is saying is either
false or nonsense.)
Overtly fictional uses apart, however, I said just now that to use
such an expression as " The king of France " at the beginning of a
sentence was, in some sense of " imply ", to imply that there was a
king of France. When a man uses such an expression, he does not
assert, nor does what he says entail, a uniquely existential pro;
position. But one of the conventional functions of the definite
article is to act as a signal that a unique reference is being made
-a signal, not a disguised assertion. When we begin a sentence
with " the such-and-such " the use of " the " shows, but does not
state, that we are, or intend to be, referring to one particular
individual of the species " such-and-such ". Which particular
individual is a matter to be determined from context, time, place
The unsophisticated kind begins :

"

Once upon time there was

. . .".

332

P. F. STRAWSON :

and any other features of the situation of utterance. Now,
whenever a man uses any expression, the presumption is that he
thinks he is using it correctly : so when he uses the expression, "the
such-and-such ", in a uniquely referring way, the presumption
is that he thinks both that there is some individual of that species,
and that the context of use will sufficiently determine which one
he has in mind. To use the word " the " in this way is then to
imply (in the relevant sense of "imply ") that the existential
conditions described by Russell are fulfilled. But to use " the "
in this way is not to state that those conditions are fulfilled.
If I begin a sentence with an expression of the form, "the so-andso", and then am prevented from saying more, I have made no
statement of any kind ; but I may have succeeded in mentioning
some one or something.
The uniquely existential assertion supposed by Russell to be part
of any assertion in which a uniquely referring use is made of an
expression of the form "the so-and-so " is, he observes, a compound of two assertions. To say that there is a is to say something compatible with there being several (bs ; to say there is not
more than one (b is to say something compatible with there being
none. To say there is one (b and one only is to compound these two
assertions. I have so far been concerned mostly with the alleged
assertion of existence and less with the alleged assertion of
uniqueness. An example which throws the emphasis on to the
latter will serve to bring out more clearly the sense of "implied" in
which a uniquely existential assertion is implied, but not entailed,
by the use of expressions in the uniquely referring way. Consider
the sentence, " The table is covered with books ". It is quite
certain that in any normal use of this sentence, the expression " the
table " would be used to make a unique reference, i.e. to refer to
some one table. I t is a quite strict use of the definite article, in
the sense in which Russell talks on p. 30 of Principia Mathematics,
of using the article " strictly, so as to imply uniqueness ". On the
same page Russell says that a phrase of the form " the so-and-so ",
used strictly, "will only have an application in the event of
there being one so-and-so and no more ". Now it is obviously
quite false that the phrase "the table " in the sentence " the
table is covered with books ", used normally, will " only have an
application in the event of there being one table and no more ".
I t is indeed tautologically true that, in such a use, the phrase will
have an application only in the event of there being one table and
no more which is being refewed to, and that it will be understood
to have an application only in the event of there being one table
and no more which it is understood as being used to refer to.

+

ON REFERRING

333

To use the sentence is not to assert, but it is (in the special sense
discussed) to imply, that there is only one thing which is both
of the kind specified (i.e. a table) and is being referred to by the
speaker. It is obviously not to assert this. To refer is not to say
you are referring. To say there is some table or other to which you
are referring is not the same as referring to a particular table.
We should have no use for such phrases as "the individual I
referred to " unless there were something which counted as
referring. (It would make no sense to say you had pointed if there
were nothing which counted as pointing.) So once more I draw
the conclusion that referring to or mentioning a particular thing
cannot be dissolved into any kind of assertion. To refer is not
to assert, though you refer in order to go on to assert.
Let me now take an example of the uniquely referring use of an
expression not of the form, "the so-and-so ". Suppose I advance
my hands, cautiously cupped, towards someone, saying, as I do so,
" This is a fine red one ". He, looking into my hands and seeing
nothing there, may say : " What is ? What are you talking
about ? " Or perhaps, " But there's nothing in your hands ".
Of course it would be absurd to say that in saying " But you've
got nothing in your hands ", he was denying or contradicting what
I said. So " this " is not a disguised description in Russell's
sense. Nor is it a logically proper name. For one must know
what the sentence means in order to react in that way to the
utterance of it. It is precisely because the significance of the word
" this " is independent of any particular reference it may be used
to make, though not independent of the way it may be used to
refer, that I can, as in this example, use it to pretend to be
referring to something.
The general moral of all this is that communication is much
less a matter of explicit or disguised assertion than logicians
used to suppose. The particular application of this general
moral in which I am interested is its application to the case of
making a unique reference. It is a part of the significance of
expressions of the kind I am discussing that they can be used,
in an immense variety of contexts, to make unique references.
It is no part of their significance to assert that they are being so
used or that the conditions of their being so used are fulfilled.
So
the wholly important distinction we are required to draw
.
is between :
(1) using an expression to make a unique reference ; and
(2) asserting that there is one and only one individual which
has certain characteristics (e.g. is of a certain kind, or stands in a
certain relation to the speaker, or both).
-

334

P. F. STRAWSON

:

This is, in other words, the distinction between
(I) sentences containing an expression used to indicate or
mention or refer to a particular person or thing ; and
(2) uniquely existential sentences.
What Russell does is progressively to assimilate more and more
sentences of class (1) to sentences of class (2), and consequently to
involve himself in insuperable difficulties about logical subjects, and
about values for individual variables generally : difficulties which
have led him finally to the logically disastrous theory of names
developed in the Enquiry and in Human Knowledge. That view
of the meaning of logical-subject-expressions which provides the
whole incentive to the Theory of Descriptions at the same time
precludes the possibility of Russell's ever &ding any satisfactory
substitutes for those expressionswhich, beginning with substantival
phrases, he progressively degrades from the status of logical
subjects.1 It is not simply, as is sometimes said, the fascination
of the relation between a name and its bearer, that is the root O F
the trouble. Not even names come up to the impossible standard
set. I t is rather the combination of two more radical misconceptions : first, the failure to grasp the importance of the
distinction (section I1 above) between what may be said of an
expression and what may be said of a particular use of it ; second,
a failure to recognise the uniquely referring use of expressions for
the harmless, necessary thing it is, distinct from, but complementary to, the predicative or ascriptive use of expressions. The
expressions which can in fact occur as singular logical subjects
are expressions of the class I listed at the outset (demonstratives,
substantival phrases, proper names, pronouns) : to say this is to
say that these expressions, together with context (in the widest
sense) are what one uses to make unique references. The point
of the conventions governing. the uses of such expressions is,
along with the situation of utterance, to secure uniqueness of
reference. But to do this, enough is enough. We do not, and
we cannot, while referring, attain the point of complete explicitness at which the referring function is no longer performed. The
actual unique reference made, if any, is a matter of the particular
use in the particular context ; the significance of the expression
used is the set of rules or conventions which permit such references
to be made. Hence we can, using significant expressions, pretend
to refer, in make-believe or in fiction, or mistakenly think we
are referring when we are not referring to anything.
This shows the need for distinguishing two kinds (among many
=And this in spite of the danger-signal of that phrase, "misleading
grammatical form ".

ON REFERRING

.

335

others) of linguistic conventions or rules : rules for referring,
and rules for attributing and ascribing ; and for an investigation
of the former. If we recognise this distinction of use for what it is,
we are on the way to solving a number of ancient logical and
metaphysical puzzles.
My last two sections are concerned, but only in the barest outline,
with these questions.
One of the main purposes for which we use language is the
purpose of stating facts about things and persons and events.
If we want to fulfil this purpose, we must have some way of
forestalling the question, "What (who, which one) are you talking
about ? " as well as t,he question, "What are you saying about it
(him, her) ? " The task of forestalling the first question is the
referring (or identifying) task. The task of forestalling the second
is the attributive (or descriptive or classificatory or ascriptive) task.
In the conventional English sentence which is used to state, or to
claim to state, a fact about an individual thing or person or event,
the performance of these two tasks can be roughly and approximately assigned to separable expressions.1 And in such a sentence,
this assigning of expressions to their separate roles correspondsto the
conventional grammatical classification of subject and predicate.
There is nothing sacrosanct about the employment of separable
expressions for these two tasks. Other methods could be, and
are, employed. There is, for instance, the method of uttering a
single word or attributive phrase in the conspicuous presence of
the object referred to ; or that analogous method exemplified by,
e.g. the painting of the words " unsafe for lorries " on a bridge, or
the tying of a label reading " first prize " on a vegetable marrow.
Or one can imagine an elaborate game in which one never used
an expression in the uniquely referring way at all, but uttered only
uniquely existential sentences, trying to enable the hearer to
identify what was being talked of by means of an accumulation
of relative clauses. (This description of the purposes of the game
shows in what sense it would be a game : this is not the normal
use we make of existential sentences.) Two points require
emphasis. The first is that the necessity of performing these two
tasks in order to state particular facts requires no transcendental
explanation : to call attention to it is partly to elucidate the
meaning of the phrase, " stating a fact ". The second is that
even this elucidation is made in terms derivative from the grammar
I neglect relational sentences ; for these require, not a modification in
of the detail.
the principle of what I say, but a c~mplicat~ion

336

P. F. STRAWSON:

of the conventional singular sentence ; that even the overtly
functional, linguistic distinction between the identifying and
attributive roles that words may play in language is prompted
by the fact that ordinary speech offers us separable expressions
to which the different functions may be plausibly and approximately assigned. And this functional distinction has cast long
philosophical shadows. The distinctions between particular
and universal, between substance and quality, are such pseudomaterial shadows, cast by the grammar of the conventional
sentence, in which separable expressions play distinguishable
roles.
To use a separate expression to perform the first of these tasks
is to use an expression in the uniquely referring way. I want now
to say something in general about the conventions of use for expressions used in this way, and to contrast them with conventions
of ascriptive use. I then proceed to the brief illustration of these
general remarks and to some further applications of them.
What in general is required for making a unique reference
is, obviously, some device, or devices, for showing both that a
unique reference is intended and what unique reference it is ; some
device requiring and enabling the hearer or reader to identify
what is being talked about. In securing this result, the context of
utterance is of an importance which it is almost impossible to
exaggerate ; and by " context " I mean, at least, the time, the
place, the situation, the identity of the speaker, the subjects which
form the immediate focus of interest, and the personal histories of
both the speaker and those he is addressing. Besides context, there
is, of course, convention;-linguistic convention. But, except
in the case of genuine pioper names, of which I shall have more
to say later, the fulfilment of more or less precisely stateable
contextual conditions is colzventionally (or, in a wide sense of the
word, ZogimZZy) required for the correct referring use of expressions
in a sense in which this is not true of correct ascri~tiveuses.
The requirement for the correct application of an expression in its
ascriptive use to a certain thing is simply that the thing should
be of a certain kind, have certain characteristics. The requirement
for the correct application of an expression in its referring use to
a certain thing is something over and above any requirement
derived from such ascriptive meaning as the expression may have ;
it is, namely, the requirement that the thing should be in a certain
relation to the speaker and to the context of utterance. Let me
call this the contextual requirement. Thus, for example, in the
limiting case of the word " I " the contextual requirement is that
the thing should be identical with the speaker ; but in the case of

ON REFERRING

337

most expressions which have a referring use this requirement
cannot be so precisely specified. A further, and perfectly general,
difference between conventions for referring and conventions for
describing is one we have already encountered, viz. that the fulfilment of the conditions for a correct ascriptive use of an expression is a part of what is stated by such a use ; but the fulfilment of the conditions for a correct referring use of an expression
is never part of what is stated, though it is (in the relevant sense
of "implied ") implied by such a use.
Conventions for referring have been neglected or misinterpreted
by logicians. The reasons for this neglect are not hard to see,
though they are hard to state briefly. Two of them are, ronghly :
(1)the preoccupation of most logicians with definitions ; (2) the
preoccupation of some logicians with formal systems. (1) A
definition, in the most familiar sense, is a specification of the
conditions of the correct ascriptive or classificatory use of an
expression. Definitions take no account of contextual requirements. So that in so far as the search for the meaning or the
search for the analysis of an expression is conceived as the search
for a dehition, the neglect or misinterpretation of conventions
other than ascriptive is inevitable. Perhaps it would be better
to say (for I do not wish to legislate about " meaning " or " analysis ") that logicians have failed to notice that problems of use are
wider than problems of analysis and meaning. (2) The influence
of the preoccupation with mathematics and formal logic is most
clearly seen (to take no more recent examples) in the cases of
Leibniz and Russell. The constructor of calculuses, not concerned
or required to make factual statements, approaches applied
logic with a prejudice. I t is natural that he should assume that
the types of convention with whose adequacy in one field he is
familiar should be really adequate, if only one could see how, in a
quite different field-that of statements of fact. Thus we have
Leibniz striving desperately to make the uniqueness of unique
references a matter of logic in the narrow sense, and Russell
striving desperately to do the same thing, in a different way,
both for the implication of uniqueness and for that of
existence.
I t should be clear that the distinction I am trying to draw is
primarily one between different rales or parts that expressions
may play in language, and not primarily one between different
groups of expressions ; for some expressions may appear in either
rdle. Some of the kinds of words I shall speak of have predominantly, if not exclusively, a referring rale. This is most obviously
true of pronouns and ordinary proper names. Some can occur

338

P. F. STRAWSON :

as wholes or parts of expressions which have a predominantly
referring use, and as wholes or parts of expressions which have
a predominantly ascriptive or classificatory use. The obvious
cases are common nouns ; or common nouns preceded by adjectives, including participial adjectives ; or, less obviously,
adjectives or participial adjectives alone. Expressions capable
of having a referring use also differ from one another in a t least
the three following, not mutually independent, ways :
(1) They differ in the extent to which the reference they are
used to make is dependent on the context of their utterance.
Words like " I " and "it " stand at one end of this
scale-the end of maximum dependence--and phrases like
"the author of Waverley " and "the eighteenth king of
France " at the other.
(2) They differ in the degree of " descriptive meaning " they
possess : by " descriptive meaning " I intend " conventional
limitation, in application, to things of a certain general
kind, or possessing certain general characteristics ". At
one end of this scale stand the proper names we most
commonly use in ordinary discourse ; men, dogs and motorbicycles may be called " Horace ". The pure name has no
descriptive meaning (except such as it may acquire a.s a
result of some one of its uses as a name). A word like " he "
has minimal descriptive meaning, but has some. Substantival phrases like " the round table "have the maximum
descriptive meaning. An interesting intermediate position
is occupied by 'impure ' proper names like " The Round
Table "-substantival
phrases which have grown capital
letters.
(3) Finally, they may be divided into the following two classes :
(i) those of which the correct referring use is regulated by
some general referring-cum-ascriptive conventions. To this
class belong both pronouns, which have the least descriptive
meaning, and substantival phrases which have the most ;
(ii) those of which the correct referring use is regulated by
no general conventions, either of the contextual or the
ascriptive kind, but by conventions which are ad hoc for
each particular use (though not for each particular utterance).
Roughly speaking, the most familiar kind of proper names
belong to this class. Ignorance of a man's name is not
ignorance of the language. This is why we do not speak
of the meaning of proper names. (But it won't do to say
they are meaningless.) Again an intermediate position

'

'

ON REFERRING

339

is occupied by such phrases as " The Old Pretender "
Only an old pretender may be so referred to ; but to know
which old pretender is not to know a general, but an
ad hoc, convention.
In the case of phrases of the form " the so-and-so " used referringly, the use of " the " together with the position of the phrase
in the sentence (i.e. at the beginning, or following a transitive
verb or preposition) acts as a signal that a unique reference is being
made ; and the following noun, or noun and adjective, together
with the context of utterance, shows what unique reference is being
made. In general the functional difference between common
nouns and adjectives is that the former are naturally and commonly
used referringly, while the latter are not commonly, or so naturally,
used in this way, except as qualifying nouns ; though they can be
and are, so used alone. And of course this functional difference is
not independent of the descriptive force peculiar to each word. In
general we should expect the descriptive force of nouns to be such
that they are more efficient tools for the job of showing what
unique reference is intended when such a reference is signalised ;
and we should also expect the descriptive force of the words we
naturally and commonly use to make unique reference to mirror
our interest in the salient, relatively permanent and behavioural
characteristics of things. These two expectations are not independent of one another ; and, if we look at the differences
between the commoner sort of common nouns and the commoner
sort of adjectives, we find them both fulfilled. These are differences of the kind that Locke quaintly reports, when he speaks of
our ideas of substances being collections of simple ideas ; when he
says that "powers make up a great part of our ideas of substances " ; and when he goes on to contrast the identity of real
and nominal essence in the case of simple ideas with their lack
of identity and the shiftingness of the nominal essence in the case
of substances. " Substance " itself is the troublesome tribute
Locke pays to his dirr: awareness of the difference in predominant
linguistic function that lingered even when the noun had been
expanded into a more or less indefinite string of adjectives.
Russell repeats Locke's mistake with a difference when, admitting
the inference from syntax to reality to the extent of feeling that
he can get rid of this metaphysical unknown only if he can purify
language of the referring function altogether, he draws up his
programme for " abolishing particulars " ; a programme, in
fact, for abolishing the distinction of logical use which I am here
a t pains to emphasise.

340

P. F. STRAWSON :'

The contextual requirement for the referring use of pronouns
may be stated with the greatest precision in some cases (e.g. " I '
and "you ") and only with the greatest vagueness in others
("it " and "this "). I propose to say nothing further about
pronouns, except to point to an additional symptom of the
failure to recognise the uniquely referring use for what it is ; the
fact, namely, that certain logicians have actually sought to elucidate the nature of a variable by offering such sentences as " he is
sick ", " i t is green ", as examples of something in ordinary
speech like a sentential function. Now of course it is true that the
word " he " may be used on different occasions to refer to different
people or different animals : so may the word " John " and the
phrase " the cat ". What deters such logicians from treating
these two expressions as quasi-variables is, in the first case, the
lingering superstition that a name is logically tied to a single
individual, and, in the second case, the descriptive meaning of the
word " cat ". But " he ", which has a wide range of applications
and minimal descriptive force, only acquires a use as a referring
word. It is tbis fact, together with the failure to accord to
expressions used referringly, the place in logic which belongs to
them (the place held open for the mythical logically proper name),
that accounts for the misleading attempt to elucidate the nature
of the variable by reference to such words as " he ", " she ", " it ".
Of ordinary proper names it is sometimes said that they are
essentially words each of which is used to refer to just one individual. This is obviously false. Many ordinary personal
namehnames par excellence-are correctly used to refer to
numbers of people. An ordinary personal name, is, roughly, a
word, used referringly, of which the use is not dictated by any
descriptive meaning the word may have, and is not prescribed
by any such general rule for use as a referring expression (or a
part of a referring expression) as we find in the case of such
words as " I ", " this " and " the ", but is governed by ad hoc
conventions for each particular set of applications of the word
to a given person. The important point is that the correctness
of such applications does not follow from any general rule or
convention for the use of the word as such. (The limit of absurdity and obvious circularity is reached in the attempt to treat
names as disguised description in Russell's sense ; for what is in
the special sense implied, but not entailed, by my now referring
to some one by name is simply the existence of some one, now being
referred to, who is conventionally referred to by that name.) Even
this feature of names, however, is only a symptom of the purpose
for which they are employed. At present our choice of names is

ON REFERRING

341

partly arbitrary, partly dependent on legal and social observances.
I t would be perfectly possible to have a thorough-going systerrb
of names, based e.g. on dates of birth, or on a minute classification
of physiological and anatomical differences. But the success of
any such system would depend entirely on the convenience of the
resulting name-allotments for the purpose of making unique
references ; and this would depend on the multiplicity of the
classifications used and the degree to which they cut haphazard
across normal social groupings. Given a sufficient degree of
both, the selectivity supplied by context would do the rest ; just
as is the case with our present naming habits. Had we such a
system, we could use name-words descriptively (as we do at present,
to a limited extent and in a different way, with some famous
names) as well as referringly. But it is by criteria derived from
consideration of the requirements of the referring task that we
should assess the adequacy of any system of naming. Prom the
naming point of view, no kind of classification would be better
or worse than any other simply because of the kind of classification-natal or anatomical-that it was.
I have already mentioned the class of quasi-names, of substantival phrases which grow capital letters, and of which such
phrases as " the Glorious Revolution ", " the Great JJTar", " the
Annunciation ", " the Round Table " are examples. While the
descriptive meaning of the words which follow the definite article
is still relevant to their referring role, the capital letters are a
sign of that extra-logical selectivity in their referring use, which
is characteristic of pure names. Such phrases are found in
print or in writing when one member of some class of events or
things is of quite outstanding interest in a certain society. These
phrases are embryonic names. A phrase may, for obvious
reasons, pass into, and out of, this class (e.g. " the Great War ").

1want to conclude by considering, all too briefly, three further
problems about referring uses.
( a ) Indefinite references. Not all referring uses of singular
expressions forestall the question " What (who, which one)
are you talking about ? " There are some .which either invite this
question, or disclaim the intention or ability to answer it. Examples are such sentence-beginnings as " A man told me that
. . .", "Some one told me that. . . ." The orthodox (Russellian)
doctrine is that such sentences are existential, but not uniquely
existential. This seems wrong in several ways. I t is ludicrous to

suggest that part of what is asserted is that the class of men or
persons is not empty. Certainly this is implied in the by now
familiar sense of implication ; but the implication is also as much
an implication of the uniqueness of the particular object of reference
as \%?henI beein a sentence with such a phrase as " the table ".
The differen;; between the use of theLdefinite and indefinite
articles is, very roughly, as follows. We use " the " either
when a previous reference has been made. and when " t h e "
signalises that the same reference is being made ; or when, in the
absence of a previous indefinite reference, the context (including
the hear's assumed knowledge) is expected to enable the hearer to
tell what reference is being made. We use " a " either when these
conditions are not fulfilleud, or when, although a definite reference
could be made, we wish to keep dark the identity of the individual
to whom, or to which, we are referring. This is the a ~ c huse
of such a phrase as " a certain person " or " some one " ; where it
could be expanded, not into " some one, but you wouldn't (or I
don't) know who " but into " some one, but I'm not telling you
who."
(b) Ident$cation statements. By this label I intend statements
like the following :
(ia) That is the man who swam the channel twice on one day.
(iia) Napoleon was the man who ordered the execution of the
Duc D'Enghien.
The puzzle about these statements is that their grammatical
predicates do not seem to be used in a straightforwardly ascriptive
way as are the grammatical predicates of the statements :
(ib) That man swam the channel twice in one day.
(iib) Napoleon ordered the execution of the Duc D'Enghien.
But if, in order to avoid blurring the difference between (ia) and
(ib) and (iia) and (iib), one says that the phrases which form the
grammatical complements of (ia) and (iia) are being used referringly, one becomes puzzled about what is being said in these
sentences. We seem then to be referrinn
" to the same uerson twice
over and either saying nothing about him and thus making no
statement, or identifying him with himself and thus producing a
trivial identity.
The bogey of triviality can be dismissed. This only arises
for those who think of the object referred to by the use of an expression as its meaning, and thus think of the subject and complement of these sentences as meaning the same because they
could be used to refer to the same person.
I think the differences between ientences in the (a) group and
sentences in the (b) group can best be understood by considering

343

ON REFERRING

the differences between the circumstances in which you would
say (ia) and the circumstances in which you would say (ib). You
would say (ia) instead of (ib) if you knew or believed that your
hearer knew or believed that some one had swum the channel twice
in one day. You say (ia) when you take your hearer to be in the
position of one who can ask : " Who swam the channel twice in one
day '2 " (And in asking this, he is not saying that anyone did,
though his asking it implies-in the relevant sense-that some one
did.) Such sentences are like answers t,o such questions. They
are better called " identification-statements " than " identities ".
Sentence (ial does not assert more or less than sentence (ibl.
, ,
It is just that you say (ia) to a man whom you take to know
certain things that you take to be unknown to the man to
whom you say (ib).
This is, in the barest essentials, the solution to Russell's puzzle
about " denoting phrases " joining by " is " ; one of the puzzles
which he claims for the Theory of Descriptions the merit of solving.
(c) The logic of subjects and predicates. Much of what I have
said of the uniquely referring use of expressions can be extended,
with suitable modifications, to the non-uniquely referring use of
expressions ; i.e. to some uses of expressions consisting of " the "
" all the ", " all ", " some ", " some of the ", etc. followed by a
noun, qualified or unqualified, in the plural ; to some uses of
" they ", " them ", " those ", " these " ; and to conjunctions of
names. Exmessions
of the first kind have a s~ecialinterest.
,.
Roughly speaking, orthodox modern criticism, inspired by mathematical logic, of such traditional doctrines as that of the Square of
Opposition and of some of the forms of the syllogism traditionally
recomised
as valid. rests on the familiar failure to recowise the
"
special sense in which existential assertions may be implied by the
referring use of expressions. The universal propositions of the
fourfold schedule, it is said, must either be given a negatively
existential interpretation (e.g., for A, "there are no Xs which
are not Ys ") or they must be interpreted as conjunctions of
negatively and positively existential statements of, e.g., the form
(for A) " there are no Xs which are not Ys, and there are Xs ".
The I and 0 forms are normally given a positively existential
interpretation. It is then seen that, whichever of the above alternatives is selected, some of the traditional laws have to be
abandoned. The dilemma, however, is a bogus one. If we interpret the propositions of the schedule as neither positively, nor
negatively, nor positively and negatively, existential, but as
sentences such that the question of whether they are being used to
make true or false assertions does not arise except when the existential
\

,

L,

344

'

P. F. STRAWSON : ON REFERRING

condition is fu@lled for the subject term, then all the traditional
laws hold good together. And this interpretation is far closer to
the most common uses of expressions beginning with " all " and
" some " that is any Russellian alternative. For these expressions
are most commonly used in the referring way. A literal-minded
and childless man asked whether all his children are asleep will certainly not answer " Yes " on the ground that he has none ; but nor
will he answer " No " on this ground. Since he has no children,
the question does not arise. To say this is not to say that I
may not use the sentence, "All my children are asleep ", with the
intention of letting some one know that I have children, or of
deceiving him into thinking that I have. Nor is it any weakening
of my thesis to concede that singular phrases of the form "the
so-and-so " may sometimes be used with a similar purpose.
Neither Aristotelian nor Russellian rules give the exact logic of
any expression of ordinary language ; for ordinary language has
no exact logic.
Oxford University

