To order books from Open Court, call toll-free 1-800-815-2280, or visit

our website at www.opencourtbooks.com.
Open Court Publishing Company is a division of Carus Publishing Company.
Original German edition first published in 1928 as Der Logische Aufbau der Welt
Copyright 0 1967 The Regents of the University of California
Copyright O 2003 Carus Publishing Company

PREFACE T O T H E SECOND EDITION

Published by arrangement with Felix Meiner Verlag and Rolf A. George
This Open Court edition is a reprinting, with minor corrections, of thc paperback edition published by University of California Press in 1969, which was a
reprinting, with minor corrections, of the hardback edition published by
University of California Press in 1967.
First printing 2003
Second printing 2005
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written
permission of the publisher, Open Court Publishing Company, a division of
Carus Publishing Company, 315 Fifth Street, P.O. Box 300, Peru, Illinois
61354-0300.
Printed and bound in the United States of America

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Carnap, Rudolf, 1891-1970
[Logische Aufbau der Welt. English]
The logical structure of the world; and, Pseudoproblems in philosophy 1
Rudolf Carnap ; translated by Rolf A. George
p. cm. - (Open Court Classics)
Originally published; California : University of California Press, 1969. With
minor corrections.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8 126-9523-2
1. Knowledge, Theory of. 2. Logical positivism. 3. Constitution (Philosophy)
I. Title: Logical structure of the world ; and, Pseudoproblems in philosophy.
11. Carnap, Rudolf, 1891-1970. Scheinprobleme in der Philosophie. English.
111. Title: Pseudoproblems in philosophy. IV. Titlc. V. Series.

Der Logische Aufbau der Welt was my first larger book, the first attempt to bring into systematic form my earlier philosophical reflections.
The first version was written in the years 1922-1925. When I read
the old formulations today, I find many a passage which I would now
phrase differently or leave out altogether; but I still agree with the
philosophical orientation which stands behind this book. This holds
especially for the problems that are posed, and for the essential features of the method which was employed. The main problem concerns
the possibility of the rational reconstruction of the concepts of all fields
of knowledge on the basis of concepts that refer to the immediately
given. By rational reconstruction is here meant the searching out of new
definitions for old concepts. The old concepts did not ordinarily originate
by way of deliberate formulation, but in more or less unreflected and
spontaneous development. The new definitions should be superior to
the old in clarity and exactness, and, above all, should fit into a systematic structure of concepts. Such a clarification of concepts, nowadays frequently called "explication," still seems to me one of the most
important tasks of philosophy, especially if it is concerned with the main
categories of human thought.
For a long time, philosophers of various persuasions have held the

vi

I

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITIOhr

view that all concepts and judgments result from the cooperation of
experience and reason. Basically, empiricists and rationalists agree in
this view, even though both sides give a different estimation of the
relative importance of the two factors, and obscure the essential agreement by carrying their viewpoints to extremes. The thesis which they have
in common is frequently stated in the following simplified version: The
senses provide the material of cognition, reason synthesizes the material
so as to produce an organized system of knowledge. There arises then
the problem of finding a synthesis of traditional empiricism and traditional rationalism. Traditional empiricism rightly emphasized the contribution of the senses, but did not realize the importance and peculiarity of logical and mathematical forms. Rationalism was aware of
this importance, but believed that reason could not only provide the
form, but could by itself (a priori) produce new content. Through the
influence of Gottlob Frege, under whom I studied in Jena, but who was
not recognized as an outstanding logician until after his death, and
through the study of Bertrand Russell's work, I had realized, on the
one hand, the fundamental importance of mathematics for the formation of a system of knowledge and, on the other hand, its purely logical,
formal character to which it owes its independence from the contingencies of the real world. These insights formed the basis of my book.
Later on, through conversations in Schlick's circle in Vienna and
through the influence of Wittgenstein's ideas they developed into the
mode of thought which characterized the "Vienna Circle." This oricntation is sometimes called "logical empiricism" (or "logical positivism"), in order to indicate the two components.
In this book I was concerned with the indicated thesis, namely that
it is in principle possible to reduce all concepts to the immediately
given. However, the problem which I posed for myself was not to
add to the number of general philosophical arguments which had
already been advanced in support of this thesis. Rather, I wanted to
attempt, for the first time, the actual formulation of a conceptual system of the indicated sort; that is to say, I was going to choose, to
begin with, some simple basic concepts, for instance sensory qualities
and relations, which are present in the raw material of experience;
then I was going to formulate on this basis further definitions for concepts of various kinds. In order to handle this task, even if only in a
few sample cases, it was necessary to have a logic available which was
much superior to the traditional variety, especially as concerns the
logic of relations. I could carry out my task thanks only to the mod-

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

I

vii

em logic which had been developed in the preceding decades, especially by Frege, Whitehead, and Russell; this logic contains a comprehensive theory of relations and their structural properties. Furthermore, through the definition of numbers and numerical functions on
the basis of purely logical concepts, the entire conceptual structure of
mathematics had been shown to be part of logic. I was much impressed
by what this modem logic had already achieved, and I realized that
further fruitful applications of its method were possible in the analysis
and reformulation of concepts of all areas, including the empirical
sciences. At the time, most philosophers did not even suspect the revolutionary importance of modem logic for philosophy and the investigation of the foundation of the sciences.
The system which is formulated in this book takes as basic elements the elementary experiences ( $ 67). Only one basic concept is
used, namely a certain relation between elementary experiences (recollection of similarity, $ 78). It is then shown that the other concepts,
e.g., the diierent senses, the visual sense, visual field places and their
spatial relations, the colors and their relations of similarity, can be
defined on this basis. It is certainly interesting that the restriction to a
single basic concept is possible. However, nowadays this procedure
appears to me to be too artificial. I should now prefer to use a larger
number of basic concepts, especially since this would avoid some drawbacks which appear in the construction of the sense qualities (cf. the
examples in $ $ 70 and 72). I should now consider for use as basic elements, not elementary experiences, (in spite of the reasons which, in
view of the findings of Gestalt psychology, speak for such a choice,
cf. 5 67),but something similar to Mach's elements, e.g., concrete sense
data, as, for example, "a red of a certain type at a certain visual field
place at a given time." I would then choose as basic concepts some of
the relations between such elements, for example "x is earlier than y",
the relation of spatial proximity in the visual field and in other sensory
fields, and the relation of qualitative similarity, e.g., color similarity.
A system such as the one I have just indicated, as well as the one
given in this book has its basis in the "autopsychological domain".
However, in the book I have already indicated the possibility of another system form whose basic concepts refer to physical objects ($ 59).
In addition to the three forms which are there given as examples for
a physical basis (5 6 2 ) I would now consider especially a form which
contains as basic elements physical things, and as basic concepts observable properties and relations of such things. One of the advan-

viii

I

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

tages of this basis is the fact that relative to the properties and relations
of the indicated sort, there is a greater degree of intersubjective agreement. All concepts which scientists use in their presystematic linguistic
conununication are of this sort. Hence a constructional system with
such a basis seems particularly suitable for a rational reconstruction of
the concept systems of the empirical sciences. In the discussions within
the Vienna Circle, Otlo Neurath and I subsequently developed the
possibility of a unified system of concepts on a physical basis. This
"physicalism" was presented in its first fairly rough form in several articles by Neurath and myself, which appeared in vols. 2-4 of Erkenntnis
(1931-1934). Subsequently it has been modified and refined in several
respects.
In the sequel I want to indicate in what respects I have changed my
position since I wrote the Aufbau. I shall concentrate on the most important points. A detailed description of the development of my philosophical thought and position is given in my intellectual autobiography
[Autob.]. (The expressons in [ I refer to some of my later publications
and to writings of other authors; cf. the "Bibliography 1961" below.)
One of the most important changes is the realization that the reduction of higher level concepts to lower level ones cannot always take
the form of explicit definitions; generally more liberal forms of concept introduction must be used. Actually, without clearly realizing it, I
already went beyond the limits of explicit definitions in the construction
of the physical world. For example, for the correlation of colors with
space-time points, only general principles, but no clear operating rules
were given ( $ 127). This procedure is related to the method of introducing concepts through postulates, to which I shall return later.
The positivist thesis of the reducibility of thing concepts to autopsychological concepts remains valid, but the assertion that the former can
be defined in terms of the latter must now be given up and hence also
the assertion that all statements about things can be translated into
statements about sense data. Analogous considerations hold for the
physicalist thesis of the reducibility of scientific concepts to thing concepts and the reducibility of heteropsychological concepts to thing
concepts. These changes have been explained in [Test.] 8 15. In that
article I suggested the so-called reduction sentences as a more liberal
form for the introduction of concepts, which is especially suitable for
dispositional concepts.
Later on I considered a method which was already used in science,
especially in theoretical physics, namely the introduction of "theo-

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

1

ix

retical concepts" through theoretical postulates and correspondence
rules, and investigated the logical and methodological character of these
concepts (cf. [Theor.]). The correspondence rules connect the theoretical terms with observation terms. Thus the theoretical terms are interpreted, but this interpretation is always incomplete. Herein lies the
essential difference between theoretical terms and explicitly defined
terms. The concepts of theoretical physics and of other advanced
branches of science are best envisaged in this way. At present I am
inclined to think that the same holds for all concepts referring to
heteropsychological objects whether they occur in scientific psychology
or in daily lie.
A comprehensive exposition of our present physicalist position has
been given by Feigl [Mental]; cf. also his article [Phys.] and my replies [Feigl] and [Ayer].
I am no longer satisfied with my discussion of the extensional
method ($5 43-45 of this book). The then customary version of the
thesis of extensionality, as it was maintained by Russell, Wittgenstein,
and myself, claimed that all statements are extensional. However, in
this form the thesis is not correct. Hence I have later proposed a
weaker version which claims that every nonextensional statement can
be translated into a logically equivalent statement of an extensional language. It seems that this thesis holds for all hitherto known examples
of nonextensional statements, but this has not yet been demonstrated;
we can propose it only as a conjecture (cf. [Syntax] $ 67; [Meaning]
3 32, Method V). Fundamentally, the method which I have called the
"extensional method" in 43 simply consists in using an extensional
language for the entire constructional system. This is unobjectionable.
However, my description of the procedures is unclear in some points.
One could get the impression that for the reconstruction of a given
concept A through concept B it is sufficient that B have the same extension as A. Actually, a stronger requirement must be fulfilled: the coextensiveness of A and B must not be accidental, but necessary, i.e. it
must rest either on the basis of logical rules or on the basis of natural
laws (cf. my article [Goodman]). This condition is not mentioned in
this book. However, it was my intention to formulate the reconstruction
in such a way that the coextensiveness holds for any person (provided
that he has normal senses and that circumstances are not "particularly
unfavorable," $ 5 70 and 72), hence is independent of the accidental
selection of his observations and the course of his wanderings
through the world. Hence the definitions of my system (to the extent

x

I

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

in which they do not have to be disregarded as erroneous) fulfill the
indicated conditions. For example, the characterization of the visual
sense by the dimension number 5 rests upon the biologic-psychological
laws which state that the visual sense is the only sense of a (normal,
not color-blind) person for which the order of qualities has five dimensions.
I want to consider briefly the most important expositions and critical
discussions of the Aufbau. Nelson Goodman has made the most thorough study of the problems dealt with in this book. In his book
[Structure] he gives an explicit exposition of my theory, and a thorough
and penetrating critical analysis, which even concerns itself with technical questions of the method used. He then describes the construction
of his own system, which has essentially the same goal as my own, but
deviates very considerably in some respects. In his contribution [Aufbau]
Goodman briefly states his opinion about my system; I have replied to
this in [Goodman]. Anybody concerned with the construction of a
similar conceptual system will find valuable suggestions in Goodman's
work even if he cannot agree with him in all points. Victor Kraft and
J0rgen Jgrgensen consider the Aufbau in c o ~ e c t i o nwith discussions
of the positions of the Vienna Circle and logical empiricism. A more
comprehensive exposition is given in Francesco Barone's book [Neopos.].
His pamphlet [Carnap] is a brief nontechnical summary for the nonspecialist. It also contains a bibliography of writings of other authors
about various aspects of my philosophical views. Wolfgang Stegmiiller
([Gegenw.] Chapter IX, sect. 5) gives a good account and discussion
of the main ideas of my book, also of physicalism and related problems.
The article "Pseudoproblems in Philosophy," which is reprinted in
this volume, appeared in 1928 at roughly the same time as the Aufbau.
However, I did not write it until the end of 1927, the end of my first
year in Vienna. Hence it shows a stronger influence of the Vienna
discussions and Wittgenstein's book. It was written for the nonspecialist
and hence is less technical than the Aufbau. The main theme is the aim
of eliminating pseudoproblems from epistemology. To begin with, a
general criterion of meaningfulness is formulated. Then this criterion is
applied to the recognition of the heteropsychological. My position at
the time represents an early phase of physicalism, about whose subsequent development I have made some general remarks above.
On the basis of this meaning criterion, several theses concerning reality are tested. It is shown that the thesis of realism, asserting the reality

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

I

$1

of the external world, as well as the thesis of idealism, denying this
reality, are pseudostatements, sentences without factual content. The
same is shown for theses about the reality or irreality of the heteropsychological. This condemnation of all theses about metaphysical reality (which is clearly distinguished from empirical reality) is more
radical than that in the Aufbau, where such theses were merely excluded
from the domain of science. My more radical orientation was due, in
part, to Wittgenstein's conception that metaphysical sentences are meaningless since they are in principle unverifiable. This position was held
by the majority of the members of the Vienna Circle and other empiricists. On the other hand, the rejection of the theses of reality was not
generally accepted. Wittgenstein had not explicitly included these theses
among the metaphysical doctrines that were to be rejected; Schlick
called himself a realist and accepted my position only later; Reichenbach did not share it at all. 1 myself have maintained these views even
after the empirical meaning criterion had undergone several changes and
had become considerably more liberal (cf. [Empir.] and [Ontol.]).
The Aufbau has not been available since the war, since not only the
printed copies, but also the plates were destroyed in the war. I want to
express my thanks to the publisher, Dr. Felix Meiner, for making the
book available again. In behalf of myself and my friends I wish to
thank Dr. Meiner for continuing to publish as long as possible our
journal Erkenntnis in spite of all the political difficulties during the
1930's.
University of California, Los Angeles
March 1961

RUDOLFCARNAP

xiv

I BIBLIOGRAPHY

1961

[Einf.] Einfiihrung in die symbolische Logik, mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung ihrer Anwendungen. Vienna (1954), 2nd rev. ed.,
1960.
[Theor.] "Theoretische Begriffe der Wissenschaft; eine logische und
methodologische Untersuchung," Zeitschr. f . philos. Forschung, 4
(1960-1961), 209-233 and 571-596. Translated by A. Scheibal in:
Feigl [Minn. St.] vol. 1, 38-76.
[Autob.] "Intellectual Autobiography." In: Schilpp.
[Replies] "Replies and Systematic Expositions." In: Schilpp.
[Ontol.] "My Views on Ontological Problems of Existence." [Replies]

PREFACE T O THE FIRST EDITION

ยง 4.

[Feigl] "Herbert Feigl on Physicalism." [Replies] f 7.
[Ayer] "A. J. Ayer on Other Minds." [Replies] f 8.
[Goodman] "Nelson Goodman on Der Logische Aufbau der Welt."
[Replies] f 21.
DEL PRA,MARIO(ed.)
Rivista Critica della Storia di Filosofia 10 (1955), Fasc. V-VI (a
double number on Rudolf Carnap).
FEIGL,HERBERT
[Empir.] "Logical Empiricism," in: D. D. Runes, ed., Twentieth Century Philosophy. New York, 1943. Reprinted and somewhat abbreviated in: H. Feigl and W. Sellars, Readings in Philosophical
Analysis. New York, 1949, 3-26.
[Minn. St.] (ed. with others) Minnesota Studies in Philosophy o f Science, vol. 1, 1956, vol. 2, 1958.
[Mental] "The 'Mental' and the 'Physical'." In [Minn. St.] vol. 2.
[Phys.] "Physicalism, unity of Science, and the Foundations of Psychology." In: Schilpp.
GOODMAN,
NELSON
[Structure] The Structure o f Appearance. Cambridge, Mass., 1951.
[Aufbau] "The Significance of Der Logische Aufbau der Welt," In:
Schilpp. Reprinted in: Sidney Hook (ed.), American Philosophers
at Work. New York, 1956.
JBRGENSEN,
JBRGEN
"The Development of Logical Empiricism." Int. Encyclopedia o f Unified Science, II/9, Chicago, 1951.
KRAFT, VICTOR
Der Wiener Kreis. Der Urspmng des Neupositivismus. Vienna, 1950.
SCHILPP,PAULA. (ed.)
The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap. The Library of Living Philosophers.
La Salle, 1965.
STEGMWLLER,
WOLFGANG
[Gegenw.] Hauptstromungen der Gegenwartsphilosophi~.2nd ed., Stuttgart, 1960.

What is the purpose of a scient%c book? I t is meant to convince the
reader of the validity of the thoughts which it presents. However, this
may not completely satisfy the reader; he may want to know, in addition, whence these thoughts came and where they lead, whether there
are movements in other areas of inquiry with which they are connected.
Only the book as a whole can demonstrate that the thoughts are correct. Here, outside of the framework of the theory, a brief answer to
the second question may be attempted: what position in contemporary
philosophy and contemporary life in general does this book occupy?
In the last few decades mathematicians have developed a new logic.
They were forced to d o this from necessity, namely by the foundation
crisis of mathematics, in which traditional logic had proved an utter
failure. I t not only proved incapable of dealing with these dificult
problems but something much worse happened, the worst fate that can
befall a scientific theory: it led to contradictions. This was the strongest motive for the development of the new logic. The new logic avoided
the contradictions of traditional logic, but aside from this purely negative virtue, it has already given proof of its positive capabilities, though
only by examining and reestablishing the foundations of mathematics.
I t is understandable that the new logic has, to begin with, found at-

xvi

I

PREFACE T O THE FIRST EDITION

tention only in the narrow circle of mathematicians and logicians. Its
outstanding importance for philosophy as a whole has been realiied
only by a few; its application to this wider field has hardly begun. As
soon as philosophers are willing to follow a scientific course (in the
strict sense), they will not be able to avoid using this penetrating and
efficient method for the clarification of concepts and the purification of
problems. This book is to go a step along this road and to encourage
further steps in the same direction.
We are here concerned, in the main, with questions of epistemology,
that is with questions of the reduction of cognitions to one another.
The fruitfulness of the new method is shown by the fact that the answer
to the question of reduction can be provided through a uniform reductional system of the concepts which occur in science. This system is
much like a genealogy; it requires only a few root concepts. It can be
expected that such a clarification of the relation of the scientific concepts to one another will also put in a new light several of the more
general problems of philosophy. It will turn out that some problems
are considerably simplified through the epistemological insights which
are obtained in this way; others turn out to be mere pseudoproblems.
But these additional tasks are only briefly mentioned in this book.
Here is a wide, largely untilled, field which awaits our attention.
The basic orientation and the line of thought of this book are not
property and achievement of the author alone but belong to a certain
scientific atmosphere which is neither created nor maintained by any
single individual. The thoughts which I have written down here are
supported by a group of active or receptive collaborators. This group
has in common especially a certain basic scientific orientation. That
they have turned away from traditional philosophy is only a negative
characteristic. The positive features are more important; it is not easy
to describe them, but I shall try to give a loose characterization. The
new type of philosophy has arisen in close contact with the work of the
special sciences, especially mathematics and physics. Consequently they
have taken the strict and responsible orientation of the scientific investigator as their guideline for philosophical work, while the attitude
of the traditional philosopher is more like that of a poet. This new
attitude not only changes the style of thinking but also the type of
problem that is posed. The individual no longer undertakes to erect in
one bold stroke an entire system of philosophy. Rather, each works at
his special place within the one unified science. For the physicist and

-' Erkenntnisse

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

I

xvii

the historian this orientation is commonplace, but in philosophy we
witness the spectacle (which must be depressing to a person of scientific orientation) that one after another and side by side a multiplicity
of incompatible philosophical systems is erected. If we allot to the individual in philosophical work as in the special sciences only a partial
task, then we can look with more confidence into the future: in slow
careful construction insight after insight will be won. Each collaborator
contributes only what he can endorse and justify before the whole body
of his co-workers. Thus stone will be carefully added to stone and a
safe building will be erected at which each following generation can
continue to work.
This requirement for justification and conclusive foundation of each
thesis will eliminate all speculative and poetic work from philosophy.
As soon as we began to take seriously the requirement of scientific
strictness, the necessary result was that all of metaphysics was banished
from philosophy, since its theses cannot be rationally justified. It must
be possible to give a rational foundation for each scientific thesis, but
this does not mean that such a thesis must always be discovered rationally, that is, through an exercise of the understanding alone. After
all, the basic orientation and the direction of interests are not the result of deliberation, but are determined by emotions, drives, dispositions, and general living conditions. This does not only hold for philosophy but also for the most rational of sciences, namely physics and
mathematics. The decisive factor is, however, that for the justification of
a thesis the physicist does not cite irrational factors, but gives a purely
empirical-rational justification. We demand the same from ourselves
in our philosophical work. The practical handling of philosophical
problems and the discovery of their solutions does not have to be
purely intellectual, but will always contain emotional elements and intuitive methods. The justification, however, has to take place before the
forum of the understanding; here we must not refer to our intuition or
emotional needs. We too, have "emotional needs" in philosophy, but they
are Wed by clarity of concepts, precision of methods, responsible
theses, achievement through cooperation in which each individual plays
his part.
We do not deceive ourselves about the fact that movements in metaphysical philosophy and religion which are critical of such an orientation have again become very influential of late. Whence then our
confidence that our call for clarity, for a science that is free from metaphysics, will be heard? It stems from the knowledge or, to put it some-

(

xviii

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

what more carefully, from the belief that these opposing powers belong
to the past. We feel that there is an inner kinship between the attitude
on which our philosophical work is founded and the intellectual attitude
-.
which presently manifests itself in entirely different walks of life; we
feel this orientation in artistic movements, especially in architecture, and
in movements which strive for meaningful forms of personal and collective life, of education, and of external organization in general. We
feel all around us the same basic orientation, the same style of thinking
and doing. It is an orientation which demands clarity everywhere, but
which realizes that the fabric of life can never quite be comprehended.
It makes us pay careful attention to detail and at the same time recognizes the great lines which run through the whole. It is an orientation
which acknowledges the bonds that tie men together, but at the same
time strives for free development of the individual. Our work is carried
by the faith that this attitude will win the future.
-

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

Vienna
May 1928

A few remarks about some details of this translation are in order.
The German editions of the Aufbau contain no footnotes. An footnotes appearing in the present edition were added by me; most of them
give the German original of certain expressions; two (in 3 3 3 and 88)
are based upon suggestions by Professor Carnap.
I have frequently omitted italics where the German text is spaced,
since in German spacing is much more common as a mark of emphasis
than italics are in English.
In the original, quotation marks are used for several purposes: to indicate the unusual employment of an expression, to mark out the first occurrence of a technical expression, or to show that a term is mentioned rather than used. Except for the last case, I have frequently
deleted quotation marks, especially where they occurred in conjunction
with spacing. I have italicized all expressions that are both spaced and
enclosed in quotation marks in the German text. Neither quotation
marks nor italics have been added.
The translation of several expressions warrants special mention. The
word 'Beziehung' has been translated either as 'relation' or as 'many
place attribute', while 'Relation' has been translated as 'relation extension'. An exception is 'basic relation' for 'Grundrelation', and 'theory

rr

I

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

of relations' for 'Relationstheorie'; other nontrivial exceptions are indicated in the footnotes. 'Aussage' has been translated both as 'statement' and as 'proposition', whichever seemed more appropriate in a
given context; 'Wesen' is rendered both as 'essence' and as 'nature'.;
'. . . of physics' is the translation of 'physikalisch', 'physical' that of
'physisch'. Other translations have been listed in the index.
The summary of the Aufbau contained in Nelson Goodman's Structure of Appearance proved very helpful in preparing this edition. The
present text follows Professor Goodman in the translation of some
technical expressions, but deviates in others.
I wish to acknowledge my special debt to Professor Carnap, whom
1 could consult on a number of occasions; since he has not supervised the translation in detail, any translation errors are entirely my
responsibility.
I also wish to express my gratitude to my colleagues at San Fernando
Valley State College, where I did most of the work on this translation, for allowing me to use some of their reader funds for the preparation of the manuscript.
Special thanks are due to Mrs. Billie Kiger, not only for her efforts
in preparing the manuscript, but also for her advice in stylistic as well
as philosophical matters, and to Mrs. Patricia Poggi for reading the
manuscript and making many valuable suggestions.

CONTENTS

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDlTION
BIBLIOGRAPHY 1961

1

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDlTION
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE I xix

East Lansing, Michigan
December 1963

I

v

xiii

I xv

THE LOGlCAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD
PART I. INTRODUCTION : OBJECTIVE AND
PLAN OF THE INVESTIGATION
CHAPTER

A.

THE OBJECTIVE / 5
1. The aim: a constructional system of concepts. 2. What does

"wnstmction" mean? 3. The method: the analysis of reality with
the aid of the theory of relations. 4. The unity of the object domain. 5. Concept and object.
B.

THE PLAN OF THE INVESTlGATlON I 11
6. The preliminary discussions (Part 11). 7. The formal problems
of the constructional system (Part 111). 8. The outline of a constructional system (Part I V ) . 9. The clarification of some philosophical problems (Part V). Summary of Part I.

Ifii

A.

B.

CONTENTS

I CONTENTS

PART 11. PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS
THE FORM OF SCIENTIFIC STATEMENTS I 19
10. Property description and relation description. 11. The concept of structure. 12. Structure descriptions. 13. About definite descriptions. 14. Example of a definite description which is purely
structural. 15. The general possibility of structural definite descriptions. 16. All scientific statements are structure statements.

SURVEY OF THE OBJECT TYPES A N D
THEIR RELATIONS ( 31
17. The significance of object types for construction theory. 18.
The physical and psychological objects. 19. Psychophysical relation, expression relation, and designation relation. 20. Correlation
problem and essence of a relation. 2 1. Problems of correlation and
essence of the aforementioned relations. 22. The psychophysical
problem as the central problem of metaphysics. 23. The cultural
objects. 24. The manifestations and documentations of cultural objects. 25. The multiplicity of autonomous object types. Summary
of Part 11.

2. MATERIAL
INVESTIGATIONS
1 88
54. Epistemic primacy. 55. Cultural objects are reducible to psychological objects. 56. The construction of cultural objects from
psychological objects. 57. Physical objects are reducible to psychological objects and vice versa. 58. The autopsychological and the
heteropsychological. 59. A system form with physical basis. 60.
System forms with psychological basis.

C . THE BASIS 1 98
1. THE BASICELEMENTS( 98
61. The two parts of the basis problem: basic elements and basic
relations. 62. Possible physical bases. 63. Possible psychological
bases. 64. The choice of the autopsychological basis. 65. The given
does not have a subject. 66. The autopsychological basis and the
problem of objectivity. 67. The choice of the basic elements: the
"elementary experiences". 68. The elementary experiences are unanalyzable. 69. The problem of dealing with unanalyzable units.
70. The procedure of proper analysis on the basis of a pair list.
71. The procedure of quasi analysis. 72. Quasi analysis on the
basis of a part similarity relation. 73. Quasi analysis on the basis
of a transitive relation. 74. About analysis and synthesis.

2. THE BASIC RELATIONS1 122
75. The basic relations as basic concepts of the system. 76. Part
identity. 77. Part similarity. 78. Recollection of similarity as basic
relation. 79. The possibility of further derivations. 80. Similarity
circles. 81. The quality classes. 82. Does one basic relation suffice?
83. The basic relations as categories.

PART 111. T H E FORMAL PROBLEMS O F T H E
A.

CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM
THE ASCENSION FORMS 1 47
26. The four main problems of construction theory. 27. The quasi
objects. 28. Propositional functions. 29. Isogeny; object spheres.
30. "Confusion of spheres" as a source of error. 31. An application.
32. The extension of a propositional function. 33. Classes. 34. Relation extensions. 35. Reducibility and construction. 36. Complex and
whole. 37. A class does not consist of its elements. 38. Construction takes place through definition. 39. Definitions in use. 40. The
ascension forms: class and relation extension. 41. The constructional levels. 42. Being and holding. 43. An objection against the
extensional method of construction. 44. The distinction between
sign statements, sense statements, and nominatum statements. 45.
Justification of the extensional method.

B. THE SYSTEM FORM

1

78

1. FORMAL
INVESTIGATIONS
1 78
46. The system form depends upon reducibility. 47. The criterion
for reducibility in realistic language. 48. The basic state of affairs
relative to an object. 49. Indicators and conditions. 50. Logical and
epistemic value. 51. Logical translation and trasslation of sense.
52. Realistic and constructional language. 53. Summary. Metbod
for solving the problem of the system form.

I

1 137
84. Derivations as preparation for construction. 85. The sense
classes. 86. The characterization of the visual sense. 87. The temporal order. 88. Derivation of visual field places. 89. The spatial
order of the visual field. 90. The ordering of colors. 91. Objections
to the given derivation of the visual field order and the color order.
92. Other possibilities for a derivation of the visual field. 93. The
"sensations" as individual constituents of experiences. 94. Prospect
of further derivations.

D. THE OBJECT FORMS

E.

FORMS OF REPRESENTING A
CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM / 152
95. The four languages. 96. The symbolic language of logistics.
97. Explanation of some logistic symbols. 98. Paraphrase in word
language and realistic language. 99. The language of fictitious constructive operations. 100. Construction as rational reconstruction.
101. The fiction of the separation and the retainability of the given.
102. The fiction of the basic relation lists. 103. About the general
nlles of construction. 104. Tentative formulation of some construc-

xxiv

1

I

CONTENTS

CONTENl'S

tion rules. 105. The problem of deducing the construction rules.
Summary of Part 111.

U
.V

PART V. CLARIFICATION O F SOME PHILOSOPHICAL
PROBLEMS ON T H E BASIS O F CONSTRUCTION THEORY
157. The constructional system as the basis of philosophical investigations.

PART IV. OUTLINE O F A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM
A.

THE LOWER LEVELS: AUTOPSYCHOLOGICAL
OBJECTS ( 175
106. About form, content, and purpose of this outline. 107. The
logical and mathematical objects. 108. The basic relation (Rs).
109. The basic elements (elex). 110. Part similarity (Ps). 111.
Similarity circles (similcirc). 112. Quality classes (qual) 113. Part
identity (Pi). 114. Similarity between qualities (Sim). 115. Sense
classes and visual sense (sense, sight). 116. Sensations (sen) and the
divisions of an elementary experience. 117. Visual field places and
visual field (place, Plid, Proxpl). 118. Colors and color solid
(Colidprox, Colid, color, Proxcol) . 1 19. Example of a retranslation of a definition and a statement. 120. The preliminary time order. 121. The derivation relation of an object. 122. The stated constructions are merely examples.

A.

SOME PROBLEMS OF ESSENCE 1 247
158. About the difference between individual and general concepts.
159. On identity. 160. The essence of the psychological, physical,
and cultural object types. 161. Constructional and metaphysical
essence. 162. About mind-body dualism. 163. The problem of the
self. 164. The nature of the intention relation. 165. The nature
of causality.

B.

THE PSYCHOPHYSICAL PROBLEM 1 266
166. Formulation of the problem. 167. The psychophysical problem
does not originate from the heteropsychological. 168. The basic
situation of the psychophysical problem. 169. Constructional and
metaphysical problems.

C.

THE CONSTRUCTIONAL OR EMPIRICAL PROBLEM OF
REALITY 1 273
170. Real and nonreal physical objects. 171. Real and nonreal objects of psychological and cultural type. 172. The concept of realtypical objects. 173. The boundary of the real-typical in the physical domain. 174. The boundary of the real-typical in the psychological and the cultural domains.

D.

THE METAPHYSICAL PROBLEM OF REALITY 1 281
175. Realism, idealism, and phenomenalism. 176. The metaphysical
concept of reality. 177. Construction theory contradicts neither
realism, idealism, nor phenomenalism. 178. The divergence among
the three schools occurs only within the field of metaphysics.

.

B.

C.

THE INTERMEDIATE LEVELS: PHYSICAL OBJECTS I 191
123. About the formulation of the further constructional levels.
124. Various possibilities for the construction of physical space.
125. The space-time world. 126. The assignment of colors to world
points. 127. Formulations of the above points in realistic language.
128. The visual thing. 129. "My body". 130. The tactile-visual
things. 131. Definite description of the remaining senses. 132. The
domain of the autopsychological. 133. The assignment of other
sense qualities. 134. Perceptual things. 135. Completion of the perceptual world through analogy. 136. The world of physics. 137.
Biological objects; man. 138. The expression relation.
THE UPPER LEVELS: HETEROPSYCHOLOGICAL AND
CULTURAL OBJECTS 1 214
139. About the presentation of subsequent constructional levels.
140. The domain of the heteropsychological. 141. The production
of signs. 142. Reports of other persons. 143. Intuitive understanding
and functional dependency. 144. The utilization of reports of other
persons. 145. The world of the other. 146. Intersubjective correspondence. 147. Intersubjective correspondence holds for all object
types. 148. The intersubjective world. 149. The intersubjective
world as the world of science. 150. The primary cultural objects.
151. The higher cultural objects. 152. The domain of values. 153.
The problem of eliminating the basic relations. 154. "Founded" relation extensions. 155. Elimination of the basic relation Rs. 156.
Theses about the constructional system. Summary of Part IV.

E. AlMS AND LIMITS OF SClENCE 1 288
179. The aims of science. 180. About the limitations of scientific
knowledge. 18 1. Faith and knowledge. 182. Intuitive metaphysics.
183. Rationalism? Summary of Part V.

PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY
I. THE AIM OF EPISTEMOLOGY
A.

T H E MEANING OF EPlSTEMOLOGlCAL ANALYSIS
1. The problem
2. Logical analysis
a. sufficient and dispensable constituent
b. the criterion: rational reconstruction

1

305

xxvi

B.

I

CONTENTS

c. the overdeterminateness of the experiential content
3. Epistemological analysis
a. nucleus and secondary part
b. first criterion: justification
c. second criterion: the possibility of error
APPLICATION: KNOWLEDGE OF THE
HETEROPSYCHOLOGICAL 1 31 6
4. Logical analysis of the cognition of heteropsychological occurrences
5. Epistemological analysis of the cognition of heteropsychological occurrences
6. Result. Survey of the genealogy of concepts

11. ELIMINATON OF PSEUDOPROBLEMS FROM THE
A.

B.

THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
THE MEANING CRITERION 1 325
7. Factual content as a criterion for the meaningfulness of statements
8. Theoretical content of a statement and accompanying representations
APPLICATION TO THE REALISM CONTROVERSY ( 332
9. The theses of realism and idealism
10. The reality of the external world
1 1. The reality of the heteropsychological

1

339
CLASSIFICATION OF POSSIBLE OPPOSING VIEWPOINTS
BIBLIOGRAPHY A N D INDEX OF NAMES 1 347
INDEX OF SUBJECTS 1 356
SUMMARY

1

341

The Logical Structure of the World

6

1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

2. What Does "Construction" Mean?
In order to indicate more clearly the nature of our objective, the "constructional system", some important concepts of construction theory
should first be explained. An object (or concept) is said to be reducible
to one or more other objects if all statements about it can be transformed
into statements about these other objects. (For the time being, the explanation in terms of the loose concept of "transformation" suffices. The
following examples will make it sufficiently clear. The exact definitions of
reducibility and construction will appear later; they will not be given in
terms of statements? but of propositional f ~ n c t i o n s . ~If) a is reducible to
b, and b to c, then a is reducible to c. Thus, reducibility is transitive.
EXAMPLE. All fractions are reducible to natural numbers (i.e.,
positive integers), since all statements about fractions can be transformed into statements about natudnumbers. Thus, for example, 3 / 7
is reducible to 3 and 7 , 2 / 5 to 2 and 5 , and the statement, " 3 / 7 > 2/Sn,
when transformed into a statement about natural numbers, turns into
"For any natural numbers x and y, if 7x = Sy, then 3x > 2y." Furthermore, all real numbers, even the irrationals, can be reduced to fractions.
Finally, all entities of arithmetic and analysis are reducible to natural
numbers.

According to the explanation given above, if an object a is reducible to
objects b, c, then all statements about a can be transformed into statements about b and c. To reduce a to b, c or to construct a out of b, c
means to produce a general rule that indicates for each individual case
how a statement about a must be transformed in order to yield a statement about b, c. This rule of translation we call a construction rule or
constructional definition (it has the form of a definition; cf. 8 3 8 ) .
By a constructional system we mean a step-by-step ordering of objects
in such a way that the objects of each level are constructed from those of
the lower levels. Because of the transitivity of reducibility, all objects of
the constructional system are thus indirectly constructed from objects
of the first level. These basic objects form the basis of the system.
EXAMPLE. A constructional system of arithmetical concepts can
be established by deriving or "constructing" step-by-step (through chains

See O 35.
Aussage
'Aussagefunktion

INTRODUCTION: OBJECTIVE AND PLAN OF THE INVESTIGATION

1 7

of definitions) all arithmetical concepts from the fundamental concepts
of natural number and immediate successor.
A theory is axiomatized when all statements of the theory are arranged
in the form of a deductive system whose basis is formed by the axioms,
and when all concepts of the theory are arranged in the form of a constructional system whose basis is formed by the fundamental concepts.
So far, much more attention has been paid to the first task, namely, the
deduction of statements from axioms, than to the methodology of the
systematic construction of concepts. The latter is to be our present concern and is to be applied to the conceptual system of unified science.
Only if we succeed in producing such a unified system of all concepts
will it be possible to overcome the separation of unified science into unrelated special scicnces.
Even though the subjective origin of all knowledge lies in the contents
of experiences and their connections, it is still possible, as the constructional system will show, to advance to an intersubjective, objective world,
which can be conceptually comprehended and which is identical for all
observers.

3 . The Method: The Analysis of Reality with the Aid of the
Theory o f Relations
The present investigations, as far as their method is concerned, are characterized by the fact that they attempt to bring to bear upon one another
two branches of science that have so far been treated separately. Both
branches have been developed independently to a considerable extent,
but in our opinion they can make further progress only if they are conjoined. Logistics (symbolic logic) has been advanced by Russell and
Whitehead to a point where it provides a theory of relations which allows
almost all problems of the pure theory of ordering to be treated without
great acuity. On the other hand, the reduction of "reality" to the
"given" has in recent times been considered an important task and has
been partially accomplished, for example, by Avenarius, Mach, PoincarC,
Kiilpe, and especially by Ziehen and Driesch (to mention only a few
names). The present study is an attempt to apply the theory of relations
to the task of analyzing reality. This is done in order to formulate the
logical requirements which must be fulfilled by a constructional system
of concepts, to bring into clearer focus the basis of the system, and to
demonstrate by actually producing such a system (though part of it is

8

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

only an outline) that it can be constructed on the indicated basis and
within the indicated logical framework.
REFERENCES. The fundamental concepts of the theory of relations
are found as far back as Leibniz' ideas of a mathesis universalis and
of an ars combinatoria. The application of the theory of relations to the
formulation of a constructional system is closely related to Leibniz' idea
of a characteristics universalis and of a scientia generalis.
Logistics. The most comprehensive system of logistics is that of Whitehead and Russell. At the moment it is the only one which contains a
welldeveloped theory of relations and therefore the only one which can
be considered a methodological aid to construction theory. It is based on
the pioneer work of Frege, Schroder, Peano, and others. It is contained
in toto in [Princ. Math.]. An outline of the system with applications is
given by Carnap [Logistik]. The concepts are explained (without symbolism) in Russell [Principles], [Math. Phil.], Dubislav [Worterbuch];
with a different symbolism: Behmann [Math.]. A historical survey with a
rich bibliography (up to 1917): Lewis [Survey]."
Applied theory o f relations. Whitehead and Russell make some suggestions for the application of the theory of relations to nonlogical objects (without carrying them through in logical detail): Whitehead's
"theory of extensive abstraction" and his "theory of occasions" in
[Space], [Nat. Knowledge], [Nature]; Russell's construction of the external world [External W.], [Const. Matter], [Sense Data]. In questions
of detail, construction theory diverges very considerably from Russell,
but it, too, is based on his methodological principle: "The supreme
maxim in scientific philosophizing is this: Wherever possible, logical
constructions are to be substituted for inferred entities" [Sense Data] 155.
We shall, however, employ this principle in an even more radical way
than Russell (for example, through the choice of an autopsychological
basis [C 641, in the construction of that which is not seen from that which
is seen [O 1241, and in the construction of heteropsychological objects
[$ 1401). Carnap [Logistik] Part 11, contains examples of the application
of the theory of relations to various subjects (set theory, geometry,
physics, theory of kinship relations, analysis of knowledge, analysis of
language).
Construction theory. The most important suggestions for the solution
Prof. Carnap suggests that it would be preferable to consult appropriate sections from his later work in symbolic logic, rather than the older [Logistik]; in
particular his Einfiihrung in die symbolische Logik, Vienna: Springer, 1954, and
his Introduction to Symbolic Logic and its Applications, New York: Dover, 1958.
Further literature can be found through: Alonzo Church, "A Bibliography of
Symbolic Logic," Journal of Symbolic Logic, I (19361, and 111 (1938). and though
reviews in subsequent issues of that journal.

INTRODUCTION: OBJECTIVE AND

PLAN

OF THE INVESTIGATION

1

9

of the problem as to how scientific concepts are to be reduced to the
"given" have been made by Mach and Avenarius. In recent times, three
different, independent attempts at a system of concepts have been made:
Ziehen [Erkth.], Driesch [Ordnungsl.], Dubislav Worterbuch]. Only
Dubislav's attempt has the form of a constructional system, since he is
the only one who introduces chains of definitions. We will indicate
agreements between our system and the just-mentioned systems on the
few occasions when they occur, but our approach is, on the whole, quite
different from those others because of the methodological tools which
we shall employ.
There is also a connection with the goal which was proposed by
Husserl, namely, his "mathesis of experiences" [PhInomenol.] 141, and
with Meinong's theory of objects. More remotely connected are the
classificatory systems of concepts (e.g., those of Ostwald, Wundt, Kiilpe,
Tillich), since they do not derive concepts from one another.

4. The Unity of the Object Domain

Iยฃ a constructional system of concepts or objects (it can b e taken in either
sense; cf. 5 5) is possible in the manner indicated, then it follows that the
objects d o not come from several unrelated areas, but that there is only
one domain of objects and therefore only one science. W e can, of course,
still differentiate various types of objects if they belong to different levels
of the constructional system, or, in case they are on the same level, if
their form of construction is different. Later on (111 A), we shall show
that the objects o n higher levels are not constructed by mere summation,
but that they are logical complexes. The object state,6 for example, will
have to be constructed in this constructional system out of psychological
processes, but it should by no means b e thought of as a sum of psychological processes. W e shall distinguish between a whole and a logical
complex. The whole is composed of its elements; they are its parts. An
independent logical complex does not have this relation t o its elements,
but rather, it is characterized b y the fact that all statements about it can
b e transformed into statements about its elements.
EXAMPLE. An analogy for the uniformity of objects and the multiplicity of different constructs7 is found in synthetic geometry. It starts
from points, straight lines, and surfaces as its elements; the higher constructs are constructed as complexes of these elements. The construction takes place in several steps, and the objects on the d8erent levels
Staat

'Gebilde

10

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

CHAPTER

are essentially diiferent from one another. Nevertheless, all statements
about these constructs are ultimately statements about the elements.
Thus we find different types of objects in this case, too, and yet a unified domain of objects from which they all arise.

5 . Concept and Object
Since we always use the word "object" in its widest sense ( S I ) , it
follows that to every concept there belongs one and only one object: "its
object" (not to be confused with the objects that fall under the concept).
In opposition to the customary theory of concepts, it seems to us that the
generality of a concept is relative, so that the borderline between general
and individual concepts can be shifted, depending on the point of view
(cf. $ 158). Thus, we will say that even general concepts have their
"objects". It makes no logical difference whether a given sign denotes
the concept or the object, or whether a sentence holds for objects or
concepts. There is at most a psychological difference, namely, a differActually, we have here not two conceptions,
ence in mental i~nagery.~
but only two different interpretative modes of speech. Thus, in construction theory we sometimes speak of constructed objects, sometimes
of constructed concepts, without differentiating.
These two parallel languages which deal with concepts and with objects and still say the same thing are actually the languages of realism and
idealism. Does thinking "create" the objects, as the Neo-Kantian Marburg school teaches, or does thinking "merely apprehend" them, as
realism asserts? Construction theory employs a neutral language and
maintains that objects are neither "created" nor "apprehended" but
constructed. I wish to emphasize from the beginning that the phrase "to
construct" is always meant in a completely neutral sense. From the point
of view of construction theory, the controversy between "creation" and
"apprehension" is an idle linguistic dispute.
We can actually go even further (without here giving any reasons)
and state boldly that the object and its concept are one and the same.
This identification does not amount to a reification of the concept, but,
on the contrary, is a "functionalization" of the object.
Gegenstandszeichen
reprasentierende Vorstellung
'O Substantialisierung

THE PLAN OF THE INVESTZGATZON

6. The Preliminary Discussions (Part 11)
The second part will be preparatory to the construction theory itself.
Thus, the arguments given there do not presuppose the basic assumption
of construction theory, namely, the possibility of a unified constructional
system, but merely seek to clarify the scientific, or perhaps more exactly,
the ontological l1 situation as it exists today.
In the first chapter (A) of Part 11, the very important concept of a
structure (in the sense of the purely formal aspects of a relation
extension) will be explained, and its fundamental importance for science
will be shown. I t will be demonstrated that it is in principle possible to
characterize all objects through merely structural properties (i.e., certain
formal-logical properties of relation extensions or complexes of relation
extensions) and thus to transform all scientific statements into purely
structural statements.
In the second chapter (B), the most important types o f objects,
namely the physical, the psychological, and the cultural la will be briefly
discussed as to their characteristics, differences, and mutual relations. We
lZ

gegenstandstheoretisch
das Geistige

1

12

THE LOGICAL STRUCTUAE OF THE WORLD

INTRODUCTION: OBJECTIVE AND PLAN OF THE INVESTIGATION

will speak, not from the point of view and in the language of construction
theory, but from the traditional viewpoint and in the (realistic) language
of the empirical sciences. This discussion will give us, in a sense, a
synopsis of the material which will be used in the formulation of the
constructional system. This leads to a nonformal requirement which
must be fulfilled, namely, the assignment of definite positions within the
system for all the indicated objects.

7. The Formal Problems of the Constructional System (Part 111)
The presentation of construction theory will bcgin with Part 111. In the
first chapter ( A ) , the concept of construction will be discussed in more
detail; in particular, it will be shown how it differs from composition by
the summation of parts. It will be shown that the construction of an
object must be given in the logical form of a definition: every object to be
constructed will be introduced through its constructional definition either
as a class or as a relation extension. Thus, in each step within the constructional system, one of these two forms will be produced. They are
the ascension forms l3 of the constructional system. Others are not
required.
In the second chapter (B), we shall undertake logical and factual
investigations concerning the object forms and the system form of the
constructional system. By the object form of a constructed object is
meant the series of constructional steps which lead to it from the basic
objects. We shall show in a general way how the object form can be established from the information found in the empirical sciences about this
object, especially about its indicators.'* By "system form" is meant the
form of the system as a whole, i.e., the arrangement of the various steps
in the system and the objects which are constructed by these steps. From
the various logically and factually possible system forms, we shall select
that one which best represents the epistemic relations of the objects to
one another.
In the third chapter (C), we shall treat of the problem of the -had^
of the constructional system, i.e., of basic objects of two essentially
different kinds, namely, the basic elements and the basic relations, where
the latter expression refers to the order which is initially established
between the basic elements. We choose as basic elements of the system

1 13

"my experiences" (more precisely, entities which initially have neither
names nor properties, and which can be called terms of relations only
after certain constructions have been carried out). Thus, we choose a
system form with an "autopsychological basis". It will then be shown how
it is possible to envisage these basic elements as unanalyzable units and
nevertheless to construct those objects which are later on called the
"properties" or "constituents" of these experiences through a procedure
which is actually synthetic, but takes on the linguistic forms of an
analysis. (We shall call this procedure "quasi analysis".)
The actual basic concepts of the constructional system, i.e., those concepts to which all other concepts of science are to be reduced, are not the
basic elements, but the basic relations. This corresponds to a fundamental
assumption of construction theory, namely, that a system of relations is
primary relative to its members. We will choose the basic relations after
certain nonformal l6 considerations. These considerations will already
prepare the lower levels of the system by dealing with the question as to
how and in what sequence the objects of the lower levels can be constructed, and what basic relations are required for the purpose. As it
turns out, a very small number of basic relations, perhaps even only one,
suffices.
In the fourth chapter (D), we shall discuss why and in what manner
the constructions in the system outline (which constitutes Part IV) are
given in four languages: namely, in the language of logistics, which is the
proper language of the system, and in three translations which are to
facilitate both the understanding of the individual constructions and the
investigation into whether these constructions fulfill certain formal requirements. These three translations are: paraphrase of the constructional
definitions in word language, the transformation of each definition into a
statement indicating a state of affairs l7 in realistic language, and the
transformation of each definition into a rule of operation on the basis
of certain fictions which serve as an aid to intuition ("language of fictitious constructive operations").

---

-

"~ t u f e x r m e n
*'

l5

Kennzeichen
erkenntnismhig

8 . The Outline of a Constructional System (Part N)
In Part IV,some of the results of the preceding investigations are applied
in practice; an outline of a constructional system is attempted. The lower
levels of the system are given in great detail (Chapter A) by representing
le sachlich
lr

Sachverhaltsangabe

14

1 T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

the individual constructions in symbolic form and translating them into
three auxiliary languages (cf. $ 7). We give this part in such great detail,
not because its content is absolutely secure, but in order to give a very
clear example of the point of the whole investigation and, in addition, to
do some spade work on the problem of achieving a reasonable formulation of the lower levels. Using only one basic relation, we shall construct
in this part, among other things, the sense qualities, the sense modalities,
the visual sense, the spatial order of the visual field, the qualitative order
of the color solid, and a preliminary time order.
In the second chapter (B), the constructions are given only in the
word language, and no longer with the previous precision, but the individual steps are still clearly described. Here, the space-time world and the
visual things in it, including "my body", as one of these visual things, the
other senses (besides vision), and the other "autopsychological" entities,
components, and states are constructed. The visual world is supplemented
by the other senses until it becomes the sensory world, and this world is
contrasted with the world of physics,18 which is no longer concerned
with sensory qualities.
In the third chapter ( C ) , constructions are given in rough outline and
only to the extent necessary to show that they can be carried out. In
particular, we shall indicate the construction of the "heteropsychologicaI"
on the basis of "other persons" (as physical things) with the aid of the
expression relation; the construction of the "world of the other person"
and the "intersubjective world". Finally, the construction of cultural
objects and values is also briefly indicated.

9. The Clarificationof Some Philosophical Problems (Part V )
In Part V, we shall consider some of the traditional philosophical problems and show how construction theory can be used in order to clarify
the problem situations to the extent to which they are part of (rational)
science. The problems which are treated there are to serve only as examples of the method, and we shall not discuss them in great detail.
T o begin with (Chapter A), some problems of essence lo are discussed,
especially the problems of identity, of psychophysical dualism, of
intentionality, and of causality.
In Chapter B, we shall try to clarify the problem of psychophysical
parallelism.
l8
lg

physikalische Welt
Wesensprobleme

INTRODUCTION: OBJECTIVE AND PLAN OF THE INVESTIGATION

1 15

Subsequently ( C , D), the problem of reality is discussed. It is shown
that construction theory is the common basis of the various philosophical
positions which attempt an answer to this problem, namely, realism,
idealism, and phenomenalism; it will also be shown that these positions
differ from one another only where they go beyond construction theory;
that is, in the field of metaphysics.
In the last chapter (E), the aims and limits of science are discussed,
and their clear separation from metaphysics is demanded.

Summary
(The numbers given in parentheses refer to the sections of the book.)

A. The Objective (1-5)
Construction theory engages in formal (logical) and substantive (epistemological) investigations which lead to the formulation of a constructional system. A constructional system is a system which (in principle) comprises d
concepts (or objects) of science, not indeed as a classificatory, but as a derivational, system (genealogy): each concept is constructed from those that
precede it in the system ( 1 ) . A concept is said to be reducible to others, if
all statements about it can be transformed into statements about these other
concepts; the general rule for this transformation of statements for a given
concept is called the consrruction of the concept ( 2 ) . Logistics, in particular
its most important branch, namely the theory of relations, serves as a methodological aid (3). Consequence of the possibility of a constructional system:
all concepts are elements of one structure; hence, there is only one science
(4). We take the constructional system to be, at the same time, the system
of all objects; the only distinction between "concepts" and "objects" is a
difference in modes of speech (5).

B . The Plan of the Investigation (6-9)

(A preliminary indication of the contents of the individual chapters)

20

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

EXAMPLES. A property description looks something like this: the
domain is formed by objects a, b, c; a, b, c are persons. a is 20 years
old and tall; b 21 years old, short, and thin; c is fat. A relation description looks something like this: the domain is formed by objects
a, b, c; a is father of b, b the mother of c, c is the son of b, a is 60 years
older than c.
N o matter how many different forms both of the two types of description may assume, they are nevcrtheless fundamentally different from one
another. From property descriptions, one can frequently draw conclusions concerning relations (in the first example, b is one year older than
a) ; conversely, from relation descriptions, one can frequently infer something about properties (in the second example, a and c are male, b is
female); however, the conclusion is then not equivalent to the premises,
but contains less: the inference cannot be reversed. Thus, the fundamental difference remains. Frequently, both kinds of description are
found together.
EXAMPLES. Property descriptions: Description of the set of conic
sections through an account of the characteristics of the individual sections. Description of a curve through its coordinate equation, i.e., by
giving the ordinate for each point on the abscissa. List of historical persons with a statement of the dates of birth and death for each of them.
Relation descriptions: Description of a geometrical figure which consists of points and straight lines through an indication of the relations
of incidence. Description of a curve through its natural equation, i.e.,
through an indication of the position of each element of the curve relative to the preceding ones. Description of a group of persons by means
of a genealogy, i.e., by giving their kinship relations.
We place such strong emphasis upon the difference between these two
types of description because we shall maintain that they are not of equal
value. Relation descriptions form the starting-point of the whole constructional system and hence constitute the basis of unified science.
Furthermore, it is the goal of each scientific theory to become, as far as
its content is concerned, a pure relation description. I t can, of course,
take o n the linguistic form of a property description; this will sometimes
even be an advantage; but it differs from a genuine property description
in the fact that it can be transformed, if necessary, without loss into a
relation description. I n science, any property description either plays the
role of a relation description except that it is in more convenient form,
o r else, if transformation is not yet possible, it indicates the provisional
character of the theory in question.

1

21

EXAMPLE. In physics, we apparently have a property description
when the color names ("blue", "red", etc.) are used. In present-day
physics, descriptions of this kind are nothing but abbreviations, since
they presuppose wave theory and since the color names can be translated into expressions of this theory (i.e., rates of oscillation). However,
formerly, these property descriptions revealed the incomplete character
of the theory of light, since they were not transformable into relation
descriptions.

11. The Concept of Structure
There is a certain type of relation description which we shall call structure
description. Unlike relation descriptions, these not only leave the properties of the individual elements of the range unmentioned, they do not
even specify the relations themselves which hold between these elements.
In a structure description, only the structure of the relation is indicated,
i.e., the totality of its formal properties. (A more precise definition of
structure will be given later.) By formal properties of a relation, we mean
those that can be formulated without reference to the meaning 20 of the
relation and the type of objects between which it holds. They are the
subject of the theory of relations. The formal properties of relations can
be defined exclusively with the aid of logistic symbols, i.e., ultimately
with the aid of the few fundamental symbols which form the basis of
logistics (symbolic logic). (Thus these symbols d o not specifically belong to the theory of relations, but form the basis for the entire system of
logic-propositional
logic, the theory of propositional functions (concepts), the theory of classes, and the theory of relations.)
Let us now consider some of the most important of these formal
properties.
A relation is called symmetrical when it is identical with its converse
(e.g., contemporaneousness); otherwise, it is called nonsymmetrical
(e.g., brother) ; a nonsymmetrical relation is called asymmetrical when
it excludes its converse (e.g., father). A relation is called reflexive if, in
the case of identity (within its field), it is always satisfied (e.g., contemporaneousness) ; otherwise, it is called nonreflexive (e.g., teacher).
A nonreflexive relation is called irreflexive if it excludes identity (e.g.,
father). A relation is called transitive when it always holds also for the
next member but one (e.g., ancestor); otherwise, nontramitive (e.g.,
friend). A nontransitive relation is called intransitive if it never holds
for the next member but one (e.g., father). A relation is called con20

inhaltlicher Sinn

22

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

nected if, between any two different members of the field, either it or its
converse always holds (e.g., for a table group of six persons, the relation "one, two, or three seats to the left of"). A relation is called a
sequence if it is irreflexive and transitive (and hence asymmetrical)
and connected (e.g., "smaller than" for real numbers). A relation is
called a similarity relation if it is symmetrical and reflexive, and an
equivalence if it is also transitive (cf. $8 71, 73).
Other formal properties of relations are one-many-ness, many-oneness, one-one-ness; specific number of elements in the field, of elements
in the domain, of elements of the converse domain, of initial elements,
last elements, etc.
In order to understand what is meant by the structure of a relation,
let us think of the following arrow diagram: Let all members of the relation be represented by points. From each point, an arrow runs to those
other points which stand to the former in the relation in question. A
double arrow designates a pair of members for which the relation holds
in both directions. An arrow that returns to its origin designates a member which has the relation to itself. If two relations have the same arrow
diagram, then they are called structurally equivalent, or isomorphic. The
arrow diagram is, as it were, the symbolic representation of the structure.
Of course, the arrow diagrams of two isomorphic relations do not have
to be congruent. We call two such diagrams equivalent if one of them can
be transformed into the other by distorting it, as long as no connections
are disrupted (topological equivalence).

12. Structure Descriptions
One can give a verbal description which is equivalent to an arrow diagram (where this diagram does not name the individual members) by
listing all pairs for which the given relation holds, without, however,
using any descriptions which have meaning outside of this list. For
example, one can number the members arbitrarily and only for the purpose of producing the list. Such a list can be inferred from the diagram,
i.e., it contains no more than the diagram; conversely, the list of pairs
allows us to construct the diagram. Thus, the list of pairs, as well as the
arrow diagram, gives the complete structure description.
If two relations have the same structure, then they are equivalent in
all formal properties. Thus, all formal properties of a relation are determined if its structure is described. On the other hand, there is no general
Pihnlichkeit

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS

1

23

rule as to which formal properties suffice to determine the structure of a
relation; it is the task of the theory of relations to investigate this question
in detail. The graphic rendition of the structure of a relation by means of
an arrow diagram is, of course, possible only if the number of members
is finite. It must be possible to give an exact definition of the concept of
structure and to indicate the structure of a given relation without the
aid of diagrams. But, in this context, it is quite permissible to use the
arrow diagram for the purposes of illustration, since, whenever such a
diagram can be drawn, it precisely reflects the structure, and since it
exhibits all the fundamental aspects of the general concept of structure.
We saw earlier that it was possible to draw conclusions concerning
properties of individuals from relation descriptions. In the case of structure descriptions, this no longer holds true. They form the highest level
of formalization and dematerialization. If we are given an arrow diagram
which contains nothing but double arrows, then we know that it represents the structure of a symmetrical relation, but it is no longer evident
whether it represents persons under the relation of acquaintance, or
towns under the relation of direct telephone connection, etc. Thus, our
thesis, namely that scientific statements relate only to structural p r o p
erties, amounts to the assertion that scientific statements speak only of
forms without stating what the elements and the relations of these forms
are. Superficially, this seems to be a paradoxical assertion. Whitehead
and Russell, by deriving the mathematical disciplines from logistics, have
given a strict demonstration that mathematics (viz., not only arithmetic
and analysis, but also geometry) is concerned with nothing but structure
statements. However, the empirical sciences seem to be of an entirely
different sort: in an empirical science, one ought to know whether one
speaks of persons or villages. This is the decisive point: empirical science
must be in a position to distinguish these various entities; initially, it does
this mostly through definite descriptions utilizing other entities. But ultimately the definite descriptions are carried out with the aid of structure
descriptions only. We shall give a detailed discussion of this in the sequel.
REFERENCES. The derivation of the concept of structure (or "relation number") is found in Russell [Princ. Math.] 11, 303 ff. Russell also
comments on the subject ([Math. Phil.] 53 ff.) and gives an indication
of the importance of this concept for philosophy and science in general
([Math. Phil.] 61 ff.). Cf. also Carnap [Logistik] 5 22.
Recently (in connection with ideas of Dilthey, Windelband, Rickert),
a "logic of individuality" has repeatedly been demanded; what is desired
here is a method which allows a conceptual comprehension of, and does

24

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

justice to, the peculiarity of individual entities, and which does not
attempt to grasp this peculiarity through inclusion in narrower and narrower classes. Such a method would be of great importance for individual psychology and for all cultural sciences, especially history. (Cf.,
for example, Freyer [Obj. Geist] 108 f.). I merely wish to mention in
passing that the concept of structure as it occurs in the theory of relations would form a suitable basis for such a method. The method would
have to be developed through adaptation of the tools of relation theory
to the specific area in question. Cf. also Cassirer's theory of. relational
concepts [Substanzbegr.] esp. 299, and the application of the theory of
relations (but not yet to cultural objects) in Carnap [Logistik] Part 11.

13. About Definite Descriptions
A scientific statement makes sense only if the meaning of the object
names which it contains can be indicated. There are two ways of doing
this. The first of these is through ostensive definitions;the object which is
meant is brought within the range of perception and is then indicated by
an appropriate gesture, e.g., "That is Mont Blanc." The second consists
of an unequivocal circumscription which we call definite description. A
definite description does not indicate all properties of the object and thus
replace concrete perception; on the contrary, it actually appeals to
perception. Also, definite descriptions do not even list all essential characteristics, but only as many characterizing properties as are required to
recognize unequivocally the object which is meant within the object
domain under discussion. T o give an example: the name "Mont Blanc" is
used to indicate the highest mountain in the Alps, or the mountain so
many kilometers east of Geneva. In order for the definite description to be
successful, it is not sufficient that the describing sentence be meaningful.
Rather, in the given object domain, there must be at least one object
with the indicated properties and, secondly, there must be at most one
such object. Thus, questions whether and what a definite description describes cannot be answered a priori, but only by reference to the object
domain in question.
In most cases, as also in the examples given, a definite description
indicates the relation of the object in question to other objects. Thus, it
seems that the problem of the determination of objects is only pushed
back one more step with each definite description, and that it can be
finally resolved only through ostensive definitions. However, we shall
presently see that, within any object domain, a unique system of definite
descriptions is in principle possible, even without the aid of ostensive

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS 1 25

definitions. However, in a given case such a system may not be obtainable, and for a given object domain one cannot decide a priori whether
or not it can be devised. It is of especial importance to consider the
possibility of such a system for the totality of all objects of knowledge.
Even in this case it is not possible to make an a priori decision. But we
shall see later that any intersubjective, rational science presupposes this
possibility.
REFERENCES. About definite descriptions, see Russell print.
Math.] I, 31 ff., 69 ff., 181 ff ., [Math. Phil.] 168 ff .; Carnap [Logistik]
8 5 7,14.

14. Example of a Definite Description Which is Purely Structural
How can it be possible to give a definite description of all objects withim
a given object domain without indicating any one of them through an
ostensive definition and without making any reference to an object outside of the given object domain? That there is such a possibility can be
seen most easily by way of a concrete example which we shall give in
great detail because of the importance of the general principle which it
illustrates.
EXAMPLE. Let us look at a railroad map of, say, the Eurasian railroad network. We assume that this map is not a precise projection, but
that it is distorted as much or more than the customary maps found in
ticket offices.It does not then represent the distances, but only the connections within the network; (in the terminology of geometry) : it indicates only the topological, not the metrical, properties of the network.
The example of the railroad map has previously been used to clarify
the concept of topological properties. It is equally well suited to clarify
the closely related, but more general, logical concept of structural properties. We assume now that all stations are marked as points, but the
map is not to contain any names nor any entries other than rail lines.
The question now is: can we determine the names of the points on the
map through an inspection of the actual railroad network? Since it is
difficult to observe an actual railroad network, let us use in its stead a
second map which contains all the names. Since our (fist) map may
be distorted more than the customary railroad maps, we will gain little
by looking for characteristic shapes, for example, the long Siberian railroad. But there is a more promising way: we look up the intersections
of highest order, i.e., those in which the largest number of lines meet.
We will find only a small number of these. Assume that we iind twenty
intersections in which eight l i e s meet. We then count, for each such

26

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTUAE OF THE WORLD

point, the number of stations between it and the next intersection on
each of the eight lines, and we will hardly find two of the eight to coincide in all eight numbers. Thus, we have identified all twenty points.
But if there are still two, or even all twenty, which have the same numbers, then all we have to do is to consider the connections between each
of the eight neighboring intersections: whether or not they have direct
connections, how many stations there are between them, how many lines
meet in these neighboring intersections, etc. Given the network as it
actually exists today: if we do all this, we will certainly not find any
further coincidences. But if we are confronted with a network where
even these characteristics do not allow us to differentiate, we would have
to proceed, step by step, from the neighboring intersections to their
neighbors, etc., in order to find still further characteristics for the main
intersections. We proceed in this way until we find characteristics which
no longer coincide, even if we have to survey our entire net. But once we
have discovered the name for even one point on the map, the others are
easily found, since only very few names qualify for the neighboring
points.
But what happens if there are two intersections for which we cannot
find any difference even after surveying the entire system? This simply
means that there are two points with identical structural characteristics
(homotopic points) as far as the relation to neighboring railroad stations
is concerned. We would gather that this relation does not suffice to give
a definite description of the objects of the given object domain. We would
have to take recourse to ostensive definitions or to one or more
other relations. To begin with, we would choose .relations of similar
kind: next to one another on the highway, on the telephone line,
etc. However, in order to stay within the limits of purely structural
statements, we must not mention these relations by name, but must
represent them only through the arrow diagram of their total network.
We must presuppose that by inspection of the geographic facts one can
determine unequivocally whether a given network map represents the
Eurasian highways or the telephone connections, etc. Through each of
these further relations, we would then seek to describe &st a few and
then all the points of the network, analogously to the procedure employed with respect to the railroad connections. No one will suppose
that there can still be two points which are homotopis under all of the
relations we have introduced. However, such a case merely contradicts
our notion of what actually exists, but is not altogether unimaginable.
Thus, in order to solve the problem in principle, we must still pose the
further problem: how can we produce a definite description if all of
these relations do not suffice? So far we have utilized only spatial relations, since their schematic spatial representation on a map is both cus-

PRELIhfINARY DISCUSSIONS

1 27

tomary and easily understood. But we can also employ all other
geographic relations and establish a connection between the various
locations through relations between the numbers of inhabitants (not
the numbers of inhabitants themselves), through economic processes,
relations of climate, etc. If we are still left with two homotopic elements
of the object domain, then we simply have two locations that are geographically indistinguishable. If we then move on to a new type of relation and take into account all historical relations between the locations,
etc., we shall ultimately have used up all the concepts of the cultural
as well as the physical sciences. If there should still be two locations for
which we have found no difference even after exhausting all available
scientific relations, then they are indistinguishable, not only for geography, but for science in general. They may be subjectively different: I
could be in one of these locations, but not in the other. But this would
not amount to an objective difference, since there would be in the other
place a man just like myself who says, as I do: I am here and not there.

15. The General Possibility of Structural Definite Descriptions
From the preceding example, we can see the fouowing: on the basis of a
structural description, through one or more only structurally described
relations within a given object domain, we can frequently provide a
definite description of individual objects merely through structure statements and without ostensive definitions, provided only that the object
domain is not too narrow and that the relation or relations have a
sufficiently variegated structure. Where such a definite description is not
unequivocally possible, the object domain must be enlarged or one must
have recourse to other relations. If all relations available to science have
been used, and no difference between two given objects of an object
domain has been discovered, then, as far as science is concerned, these
objects are completely alike, even if they appear subjectively different.
(If the given assumptions are all fumed, then the two objects are not
only to be envisaged as alike, but as identical in the strictest sense. This is
not the place to give a justification for this apparently paradoxical assertion.) Thus, the result is that a definite description through pure
structure statements is generally possible to the extent in which scientific
discrimination is possible at all; such a description is unsuccessful for two
objects only if these objects are not distinguishable at all by scientific
methods.
Through the method of structural definite descriptions, it now becomes
Possible to assign unique symbols to empirical objects and thus to make

I

28

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

them accessible to conceptual analysis.22On the other hand, it is precisely
this assignment of symbols which allows the characterization of empirical
objects as individuals. Thus, in this method lies the explanation for the
"strange fact that, in c0gnition,2~we correlate two sets, the elements of
one of which are defined only through this correlation" (Reichenbach
[Erk.] 38).
The purely structural definite descriptions which I have here discussed are closely related to the implicit definitions which Hilbert has
used for his axiomatic geometry [Grundlagen] and whose general methodology and scientific importance have been discussed by Schlick [Erkenntnisl.] 29 ff. An implicit definition or definition through axioms
consists in the following: one or more concepts are precisely determined
by laying down that certain axioms are to hold for them. Of the axioms
we require nothing but consistency, a formal-logical property which
can be ascertained through purely logical considerations. Statements
which can then be made about an object that has in this way been
implicitly defined follow deductively from the axioms, i.e., through
another purely logical procedure. Strictly speaking, it is not a definite
object (concept) which is implicitly defined through the axioms, but
a class of them or, what amounts to the same, an "indefinite object" or
"improper concept"; cf. Carnap [Uneigentl.].
A structural definite description, in contradistinction to an implicit
definition, characterizes (or defines) only a single object, to wit, an
object belonging to an empirical, extralogical domain. (In the example
of 1 14, it was an individual railroad station in the object domain which
consisted of the Eurasian railroad stations.) Thus, for the validity of
such a description, it is not only required that the describing structure
statements be consistent, but, in addition, the following empirical requirements must also be fulfilled: in the object domain in question, at
least one object must exist which answers the description, and at most
one such object must exist. Further statements about the object which
has thus been described are then not all of them analytic, that is, deducible from the defining statements, as is the case with implicitly
defined objects, but some of them are synthetic, namely, empirical
findings within the object domain in question.

16. All Scientific Statements are Structure Statements
It becomes clear from the preceding investigations about structural definite descriptions that each object name which appears in a scientific
2Z

Bearbeitung

23

Erkenntnis

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS

1

29

statement can in principle (if enough information is available) be replaced by a structural definite description of the object, together with an
indication of the object domain to which the description refers. This
holds, not only for the names of individual objects, but also for general
names, that is, for names of concepts, classes, relations (as we have seen
in the example of $ 14, for the relation of road connections and so
forth). Thus, each scientific statement can in principle be transformed
into a statement which contains only structural properties and the indication of one or more object domains. Now, the fundamental thesis of
construction theory (cf. $ 4 ) , which we will attempt to demonstrate in
the following investigation, asserts that fundamentally there is only one
object domain and that each scientific statement is about the objects in
this domain. Thus, it becomes unnecessary to indicate for each statement
the object domain, and the result is that each scientific statement can in
principle be so transformed that it is nothing but a structure statement.
But this transformation is not only possible, it is imperative. For science
wants to speak about what is objective, and whatever does not belong to
the structure but to the material (i.e., anything that can be pointed out
in a concrete ostensive definition) is, in the final analysis, subjective.
One can easily see that physics is almost altogether desubjectivized, since
almost all physical concepts have been transformed into purely structural
concepts.
To begin with, all mathematical concepts are reducible to concepts
which stem from the theory of relations: four-dimensional tensor and
vector fields are structural schemata; the network of world lines with
the relations of coincidence and local time order is a structural schema
in which only two relations are still named; and even these are uniquely
determined through the character of the schema.
From the point of view of construction theory, this state of affairs is to
be described in the following way. The series of experiences is different
for each subject. If we want to achieve, in spite of this, agreement in the
names for the entities which are constructed on the basis of these experiences, then this cannot be done by reference to the completely divergent
content, but only through the formal description of the structure of these
entities. However, it is still a problem how, through the application of
uniform formal construction rules, entities result which have a structure
which is the same for all subjects, even though they are based on such
immensely different series of experiences. This is the problem of intersubjective reality. We shall return to it later. Let it suffice for the moment

30

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

CHAPTER

to say that, for science, it is possible and at the same time necessary to
restrict itself to structure statements. This is what we asserted in our
thesis. It is nevertheless evident from what has been said in ยง 10 that
scientific statements may have the linguistic form of a material relation
description or even the form of a property description.
REFERENCES. Considerations similar to the preceding ones have
sometimes led to the standpoint that not the given itself (viz., sensations), but "only the relations between the sensations have an objective
value" (Poincarb [Wert] 198). This obviously is a move in the right
direction, but does not go far enough. From the relations, we must go
on to the structures of relations if we want to reach totally formalized
entities. Relations themselves, in their qualitative peculiarity, are not
intersubjectively communicable. It was not until Russell ([Math. Phil.]
62 f.) that the importance of structure for the achievement of objectivity was pointed out.

SURVEY OF THE OBJECT TYPES
AND THEIR RELATIONS

17. The Significance o f Object Types for Construction Theory
In the present chapter (11, B), we do not undertake any new investigations, but merely give a survey of the different independent object types
according to their familiar characteristic properties. We shall also discuss
those relations between these types which have given rise to metaphysical
problems (as, for example, the psychophysical relation), or are important
for the logical-epistemic relation between the object types and therefore
also for the problems of construction (as, for example, the expression
relation).
The problem of object types and their mutual relations is of great
knportance for construction theory since its aim is a system of objects.
The various differences and relations which can be indicated, and especially the differences between the various "object spheres", must somehow be reflected in the system that we are about to develop. This is an
especially important test for our form of construction theory, since we
subscribe to the thesis that the concepts of all objects can be derived
from a single common basis.
When, later on, we give a presentation of construction theory, we shall
not presuppose any of the factual results and problems of the present

32

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTUAE OF THE WORLD

chapter, but will undertake the entire construction from the very beginning. There are only a few stages in the development of the system where
we shall pay any attention to some of these facts. They will become the
most important test when we judge our final result. On the other hand,
the theory will lead to the conclusion that the problems which are discussed in the present chapter do not even occur in the newly developed
system of objects; the obscurity and confusion which is the source of
these problems did not arise because the facts themselves are complicated
but because of certain traditional conceptual mistakes, which must be
explained historically rather than by reference to the facts in question.
(Objections against the assertions of this chapter should therefore be
postponed until these assertions are later on employed in the formulation
of the system.)
Thus, this chapter, even more than the preceding one (11, A ) has a
preparatory character, and can therefore be omitted without disturbing
the context of construction theory which will be presented in the subsequent chapters. The only exceptions are the more fundamental discussions in ยง ยง 20, 22, and 25.

18. The Physical and Psychologica2 Objects
The concepts of the physical and the psychological are here to be taken
in their customary sense, and therefore we will not give any explicit
explanation, much less a definition, especially since both of them are in
certain respects vague and, moreover, "logically impure" concepts
(0 29).
As examples of physical objects, we consider their most important
type, namely, physical bodies. These are characterized especially by the
fact that, at a given time, they occupy a given space (i.e., an extended
piece of space). Thus, place, shape, size, and position belong to the
determining characteristics of any physical body. Furthermore, at least
one sensory quality belongs to these determining characteristics, e.g.,
color, weight, temperature, etc.
Since we take the word "object" here always in its widest sense (i.e.,
as something about which a statement can be made), we make no
distinction between events and objects. To the psychological objects
belong, to begin with, the acts of consciousness: perceptions, representation~,~.'
feelings, thoughts, acts of will, and so on. We count among
them also unconscious processes to the extent to which they can be con-

''Vorstellungen

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS

1 33

sidered analogous to acts of consciousness, for example, unconscious
representations.
The psychological objects have in common with the physical ones that
they can be temporally determined. In other respects, a sharp distinction
must be drawn between the two types. A psychological object does not
have color or any other sensory quality and, furthermore, no spatial
determination. Outside of these negative characteristics, psychological
objects have the positive characteristic that each of them belongs to some
individual subject.

19. Psychophysical Relation, Expression Kelation, and Designation
Relation
The psychophysical relation holds between a psychological process and
the "corresponding" or "parallel" process of the central nervous system.
The theory which is advanced most frequently holds that all psychological objects belong to the domain of this relation, while the converse
domain is formed by only a very small segment of the physical objects,
namely, the processes in the nervous system of the living animal (or,
perhaps, only the human) body.
Through voice, facial expressions, and other gestures, we can understand "what goes on within" a person. Thus, physical processes allow
us to draw conclusions concerning psycho1ogicaI ones. The relation between a gesture, etc,, and the psychological process we call the expression relation. T o its domain belong almost all motions of the body and
its members, in particular also the involuntary ones. T o its converse
domain belong part of the psychological objects, especially the emotions.
Many physical objects which we utilize to understand other people
and of which we say that they "express" something psychological, do
not stand in the direct expression relation, as we have explained it, to
that which they express, but rather in a more complex relation. This
holds for all physical objects which are not processes of the body of
another person. For example, it holds for pieces of writing and other
artifacts, spoken words (i.e., the sound waves in the air), etc. There is
a causal relation between these physical objects and the member of the
domain of the expression relation proper, that is, the motions of the body.
This causal relation is of such a nature that it preserves the characteristic features which carry the expression. Only because handwriting
coincides in certain characteristic features with the motion of the hand
can we use it in graphology as a sign of psychological facts. Thus, even

34

1

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

in these cases, we have to go back to the actual expression relation which
holds between the motions of the hand (but not the marks on the paper)
and the psychological events.
The expression relation must be carefully distinguished from the designation relation. This relation holds between those physical objects which
"designate" and that which they designate, for example, between the
sign "Rome" and the city of Rome. All objects, inasmuch as they are
objects of conceptual knowledge, are somehow designated or, at least,
can in principle be designated. Thus, to the converse domain of the
designation relation belong the objects of all object types.
In some cases, the same physical object stands at the same time in an
expression relation and in a designation relation to something psychological. In these cases, the relations must and can be well distinguished. For
example, spoken words are, in any case, expression for something psychological, no matter what their content. For the sound of the voice, the
speed, or the rhythm, but also the choice of the individual words and
the style, betray something about the momentary psychological condition
of the speaker. But, in addition to this, the words have a meaning. The
difference between their expressive content and their meaning content is
easily recognized, especially when the meaning concerns something other
than psychological processes within the speaker.

20. Correlation Problem and Essence ofa Relation
With each relation, there are connected two problems of a different kind;
the difference between them is of special importance when the relation
holds between objects of different object types. We call the correlation
problem the question: between which pairs of objects does the relation
hold? More precisely, what is the general law of correlation of the relation in question? The answer, then, has the following form: If the referent is of such and such a nature, then the corresponding relatum has
such and such a nature (or vice versa).
EXAMPLE. Let us consider the designation relation as it holds be-

tween written words and their meanings. Since natural languages do
not have general rules which allow us to deduce the meaning of a
word from its form, there is no way of indicating the extension of this
relation except by enumeration of all its member pairs. If a basic language is already known, then this is done through a dictionary; otherwise, the answer takes on the form, for example, of a botanical garden,
that is, a collection of objects, each of which has its name written on it,

11
lp

1
1

1

35

If the meanings of the words are known, then the answer to the correlation problem of the designation relation for sentences can be solved
through a general function, which, however, is usually very complicated. It is the syntax of the language in question cast in the form of a
meaning rule. A meaning rule may (in an elementary case) have the
following form: if a sentence consists of three words, a noun in the
nominative case; a verb in the third person singular, present tense, active
mood; and a noun in the accusative case, then it designates the state
of affairs that the object of which the first word is the sign stands to
the object of which the third word is the sign in the relation of which
the verb is the sign.

From the correlation problem, we distinguish the essence problem.
Here we do not simply ask between what objects the relation obtains,
but what it is between the correlated objects, by virtue of which they are
connected. The question does not ask for the constitution of the related
object, but asks for the essence of the relation itself. Later on, on the
basis of construction theory, we shall indicate the diierence between science and metaphysics ( 8 182), and we shall see that the essence problems belong to metaphysics ( $8 161, 165, 169).
EXAMPLE. The causal relation (i.e., the relation between cause and
effect, as it occurs within physics) gives us a very clear example of the
meaning of the essence problem in contradistinction to the correlation
problem and the resulting division of labor between the special sciences
and metaphysics. The question which cause is causally related to which
effect (that is, the correlation problem), is the concern of physics. Its
task is to 6nd an answer to that question in the form of a general functional law (i.e., in the form: if the cause is of such and such a nature,
then the effect is of such and such a nature). The answers which physics
gives to this question are the natural laws. On the other hand, physics
does not answer the question of what kind is the relation which obtains
between two events that are related to one another as cause and effect.
It does not tell us the nature of their connection, of "causal efficacy".

The problems of causality will be more precisely formulated and discussed subsequent to construction theory ( 5 165).
The nature of the essence problem is closely connected with the concept of an essential relation." By this is meant that which connects the
members of a relation "essentially" or "really" or "actually", in contradistinction to the relation as a mere correlation which only points out
the members that are so correlated. Later on it will be shown ( ยง 161)
25

Wesensbeziehung

38

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

that the problem of essential relations as well as the essence problem of
a relation can, within (rational) science, neither be resolved nor even
posed. It belongs to metaphysics.
EXAMPLE. Especially in connection with the problem of causality,
the concept of essential relations plays an important role. In discussions
about the foundations of physics, one frequently finds the (erroneous)
assumption, which is directed against certain positivistic or mathematicizing theories, that causality as a centra.1 concept of physics means not
only correlation (i.e., mathematical function), but also an essential
relation between the correlated processes, namely, the "effect", in the
narrow sense, of one process upon the other.

21. Problems of Correlation and Essence of the Afore-mentioned
Relations
The example of causality shows that the investigation of the correlation
problem is the task of the special sciences. The same holds for the correlation problems of the earlier mentioned relations. Brain physiology,
psychology, and psychopathology concern themselves with the correlation
problem of the psychophysical relations. They attempt to ascertain what
kind of physiological process in the central nervous system corresponds
to a given psychological process, and vice versa. Very little has been
done to solve this problem. The technical difficulties of such an investigation are patent; on the other hand, it is certainly not the case that
there are fundamental obstacles, i.e., absolute limits to our knowledge of
these matters. There has not been much research into the expression
relation, even though it is very important for practical life, since our
understanding of other persons depends upon it. However, we possess
and utilize this knowledge, not in a theoretically explicit manner, but
only intuitively ("empathy"). This is the reason why there is no satisfactory solution of the correlation problem of this relation. On the other
hand, there are today promising beginnings to theories of physiognomies,
graphology, and characterology. The correlation problem of the vast and
variegated designation relation can hardly be resolved within a single
theoretical system. In spite of the immense extension of the designation
relation (written signs, signals, badges, etc.), there are fewer acuities
to be expected in this case than with the other discussed relations; at
least, there will be no fundamental difficulties.
Thus we see that the correlation problems of the indicated relations
will have to be solved within certain special sciences, and that no funda-

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS 1 37

mental difficulties stand in the way of these solutions. On the other hand,
the essence problems of these relations are a different matter. Since we
are here concerned not with the ascertainment, but with the interpretation
of facts, these questions cannot be empirically answered. Thus, their
treatment is not among the tasks of the special sciences.
If, in connection with correlation problems, we encounter several
competing hypotheses, between which we cannot decide, we can at least
indicate which empirical data would be required to decide in favor of
one hypothesis or another. On the other hand, no decisions have been
made between various fundamentally opposed answers to essence problems, and apparently it is impossible to make such decisions: a depressing
aspect for the impartial observer, since, even with the boldest hopes for
future progress in knowledge, he cannot expect to find out which empirical or other sort of knowledge could bring about such a decision.
The question about the essence of the expression relation has received
Merent, diverging, and even in part contradicting answers. The expressive act has sometimes been interpreted as the effect of the psychological
facts that are expressed (thus, the problem has been pushed back to the
essence problem of the causal relation), or else as its cause, or the
two have been identified with one another. Occasionally, the expressed
emotion is said to "inhere" in a special, unanalyzable way in the physical
expression. Thus, the most divergent essential relations have been envisaged. The problem of the designation relation is somewhat simpler, since
the connection between sign and signified object always contains a conventional component; that is, it is somehow brought about voluntarily.
Only rarely has a special essential relation of "symbolizing" been
assumed.

22. The Psychophysical Problem as the Central Problem of
Metaphysics
The essence problem of the psychophysical relation can be called simply
the psychophysical problem. Among the traditional problems of philosophy, it is the one which is most closely connected with the psychophysical
relation, and, in addition, it has gradually become the main problem of
metaphysics.
The question is this: provided that to all or some types of psychological processes there correspond simultaneous processes in the central
nervous system, what connects the processes in question with one another? Very little has been done toward a solution of the correlation

38

J

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

problem of the psychophysical relation, but, even if this problem were
solved (i.e., if we could infer the characteristics of a brain process from
the characteristics of a psychological process, and vice versa), nothing
would have been achieved to further the solution of the essence problem
(i.e., the "psychophysical problem"). For this problem is not concerned
with the correlation, but with the essential relation; that is, with that
which "essentially" or "fundamentally" leads from one process to the
other or which brings forth both from a common root.
The attempted solutions and also their irreconcilable divergences are
well known. The theories of occasionalism and of preestablished harmony have perhaps only historical interest. Thus, there still remain, in
the main, three hypotheses: mutual influence, parallelism, and identity
in the sense of the two-aspect theory. The hypothesis of mutual influence
assumes an essential relation between the two terms (i.e., a causal efficacy in both directions). The hypothesis of parallelism (in the narrowest sense, i.e., excluding the identity theory) denies the existence of an
essential relation and assumes that there is only a functional correlation
between the two types of objects (types of processes). Finally, the
identity theory does not even admit that there are two types of objects,
but assumes that the psychological and the physical are the two "aspects" ("the outer" and "the inner") of the same fundamental process.
The counterarguments which are brought forth against each of these
hypotheses by its adversaries seem to be conclusive: science generally
assumes an uninterrupted causal nexus of all spatial processes; but this
is not consistent with psychophysical mutual influence. On the other
hand, one cannot see how a merely functional correlation, that is, a
logical and not a real relation, can result in an experience which corresponds to the stimuli that impinge upon the senses. And the identity
of two such differenttypes of objects as the psychological and the physical remains an empty word as long as we are not told what is meant by
the figurative expression "fundamental process" and "inner and outer
aspects." (We do not wish to say anything against parallelism or the
hypothesis of mutual influence as long as they are merely used heuristically, as working hypotheses for psychology. We are here concerned
with metaphysical opinions.)
Three contradicting and equally unsatisfactory answers and no possibility of finding or even imagining an empirical fact that could here make
the difference: a more hopeless situation can hardly be imagined. It
could lead us to wonder whether the questions concerning problems of
essence, especially the psychophysical problem, are not perhaps posed in
a fallacious way. Construction theory will in fact lead to the conclusion

/ 39

that this is so. Once the constructional forms of the objects and the object
types are found and their logical locations in the constructional system
are known, and if furthermore the correlation problem of one of the
above relations has been resolved, then we have found everything
(rational) science can say about that relation. An additional question
concerning the "essence" of the relation would lack any sense. It cannot
even be formulated in scientific terms. The discussions of Part V will
show this in more detail (Q I57 ff.).

23. The Cultural Objects
For philosophy, the most important types of objects, outside of the physical and the psychological ones, are the cultural (historical, sociological)
objects.26 They belong in the object domain of the cultural sciences.27
Among the cultural objects, we count individual incidents and large
scale occurrences, sociological groups, institutions, movements in all
areas of culture, and also properties and relations of such processes and
entities.
The philosophy of the nineteenth century did not pay sufficient attention to the fact that the cultural objects form an autonomous type. The
reason for this is that epistemological and logical investigations tended to
confine their attention predominately to physics and psychology as paradigmatic subject matter areas. Only the more recent history of philosophy
(since Dilthey) has called attention to the methodological and objecttheoretical peculiarity of the area of the cultural sciences.
The cultural objects have in common with the psychological ones the
fact that they, too, are subject bound; their "bearers" are always the
persons of a certain group. But, in contrast to the psychological objects,
their bearers may change: a state or a custom can persist even though
the bearing subjects perish and others take their place. Moreover, the
cultural objects are not composed of psychological (much less physical) objects. They are of a completely different object type; the cultural
objects belong to other object spheres (in a sense to be explained later
on, ยง 29) than the physical and the psychological objects. This means
that no cultural object may be meaningfully inserted into a proposition
about a physical or a psychological object.
Later on, in the context of construction theory, we shall show in what
way the assertion of the unity of the entire domain of objects of knowl-

---

ze geistige Gegenstiinde

'' Geisteswissenschaften

40

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

edge refers to the derivation ("construction") of all objects starting
from one and the same basis, and that the assertion that the various
spheres of objects are different means that there are different constructional levels and forms. Thus the two apparently opposing positions are
reconciled (cf. $ 41 ) .

24. The Manifestations and Documentations of Cultural Objects
I wish to discuss here only the two most important relations between
cultural and other objects, since knowledge of cultural objects, and thus
their construction, depends entirely upon these relations. We call these
two relations "manifestation" and "documentation".
A cultural object which exists during a certain time, does not have
to be actual (i.e., manifested) at all points during this span. The psychological processes in which it appears or "manifests" itself, we shall call
its (psychological) manifestation. The relation of the (psychological)
manifestation of a cultural object to the object itself, we shall call the
manifestation relation (more precisely: the psychological-cultural or,
more briefly, the psychological manifestation relation).
EXAMPLE. This relation holds, for example, between the present
resolve of a man to lift his hat before another man, and the custom of
hat-lifting. This custom does not exist merely during those moments in
which somebody somewhere manifests it, but also during the times in
between, as long as there are any persons who have the psychological
disposition to react to certain impressions by greeting somebody through
lifting their hats. During the times in between, the custom is "latent".

A physical object can also be the manifestation of a cultural one. Thus,
the custom of hat-lifting manifests itself, for example, in the appropriate
bodily motions of a certain man. But closer scrutiny shows that, even
here, the psychological manifestation relation is fundamental. Thus we
shall always mean the latter when we simply speak of the manifestation
relation.
We call documentations of a cultural object those permanent physical
objects in which the cultural life is, as it were, solidified: products, artifacts, and documents of a culture.
EXAMPLES. The documentations or representations of an art style
consist of the buildings, paintings, statues, etc. which belong to this
style. The documentation of the present railroad system consists of all
stationary and rolling material and the written documents of the railroad business.

PFELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS

I

41

It is the task of the cultural sciences to deal with the correlation problems of the manifestation and documentation relation. These sciences
have to ascertain in which acts (in the physical and psychological sense)
the individual cultural objects become overt and manifest themselves.
In so doing they form, as it were, definitions for all the names of cultural
objects. On the other hand, the documentation relation is of special
importance for the cultural sciences, because the research into no longer
existing cultural objects (and these, after all, form the larger part of the
domain) rests almost exclusively upon conclusions drawn from documentation, namely, from written records, illustrations, things that have
been built or formed, etc. But these conclusions presuppose that the documentation correlation (that is, the answer to the correlation problem of
the documentation relation) is known. Thus, for the cultural sciences,
the tasks of providing definitions, and of finding criteria for the recognition of their objects will be fulfilled by resolving these two correlation
problems.
As with the relations which we considered earlier ( $ $ 21, 22), here,
too, examination of the correlation problems is part of the task of the
special sciences. The study of the essence problems, on the other hand,
belongs to metaphysics. I do not wish to discuss at this time the attempted solutions of the essence problems (e.g., emanation theory, incarnation theory, psychologistic and materialistic interpretation). Here we
find a situation very similar to that which held for the earlier essence
problems: a struggle between divergent opinions, where there seems to
be no possibility that a decision can be made through empirically obtained information.

25. The Multiplicity of Autonomous Object Types
After the physical, the psychological, and the cultural object types, I wish
to give some examples of further autonomous object types. In the sequel,
we shall reformulate the statement that each of these object types is
"autonomous" by saying, more precisely, that they belong to different
"object spheres" ( $ 29). Later on, after we have given an account of
construction theory, we shall have to ascertain whether the conceptual
system which is based on this theory, namely, the "constructional system" (Part IV), provides a place for each of the object types which we
have just mentioned.
Later ( $ 41 ), we shall show that the assertion of the multiplicity of

42

1

PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS 1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLL3

It can easily be seen that this list of object types can be continued.
but it should suffice for our purposes. It shows that there is a multiplicity of object types, and it can be used to test the adequacy of a
system of objects, in our case, of the constructional system.

independent object types only apparently contradicts the thesis of the
unity of the object domain.
EXAMPLES. Logical objects: Negation, implication, indirect proof.
These are logical objects in the narrower sense, i.e., excluding the mathematical objects which are closely connected with them, but which, in
accordance with the customary separation of the sciences, we shall not
mention at this time. However, the boundary line is somewhat arbitrary.
(The logical objects will later on be incorporated into the "constructional system" of concepts [they will be "constructed"] !j 107.)
Mathematical objects: The number 3, the class of all algebraic numbers, the equilateral triangle. The triangle is here to be understood, not
in the concrete-spatial, but in the mathematical-abstract, sense (construction of mathematical objects: $ 107).
The object type of spatial configurations: The sphere, the equilateral
triangle. Here, these expressions are not meant as expressions of abstract, nonspatial geometry, but in their ordinary, concrete-spatial sense
(cf. mathematical objects). Physical objects are to be distinguished
sharply from spatial configurations, since the latter lack the determinations of time, space, color, weight, etc. (construction of the spatial configurations: ยง 125).
The object type of the colors: grey, red, green. The colors do not have
any determination of time or space (they are meant in the purely phenomenal sense); also, they are not, strictly speaking, determined as to
color, weight, or other sensory qualities; this distinguishes them from
physical objects. The difference between the colors and the psychological objects consists in the difference between the contents of a
representation and the representation. (Construction of colors: 118;
in order to construct them as intersubjective objects, we would still
have to apply to them the procedures of 8 149. The same holds also
for the constructions that are given below.)
The object type of pitches: c, e, the chord c-e-g. The object types of
odors and tastes are also to be mentioned as independent object types,
just as colors and pitches (construction of the sensory qualities: ยง ยง 131,
133).
Biological objects: the oak, the horse. (Both of them are to be understood as species and not as individuals.) Such a biological object is
not a sum of physical objects, but a complex of them; that is to say, a
class; about the difference between a complex and a collection, cf. 36,
specifically between class and collection, 137 (construction of biological objects: 8 137).
Ethical objects: duty, obedience, ethical value (of an act). About the
difference between these and psychological objects, cf. what has been
said in connection with the colors (construction: 152).

43

Summary

i

A. The Form of Scientific Statements (10-16)

A property description of a domain indicates the properties of the individual
objects of that domain; a relation description indicates merely the relations
between the objects. Construction theory views the latter as more fundamental (10). Two relations are said to be "isomorphic" or "of the same structure" if they agree in their formal properties, more precisely, if there is a
one-to-one correspondence between them (to help visualize this: two relations are isomorphic if they have the same arrow diagram). That which is
common to isomorphic relations (in the terminology of logistics: the class of
these relations) is called their structure ( 11) A relation description is called
a structure description, if the relations which occur are not themselves mentioned but only their structure is indicated. A structure description is given
either through an (unnamed) arrow diagram or through a list of numberpairs. The structure description forms the highest level of formalization in
the representation of a domain. Thesis: the representation of the world in
science is fundamentally a structure description ( 12). By the definite description of an object is meant a unique characterization of that object, i.e., a
characterization which allows an unequivocal identification of that object in
the object domain in question (13). Thesis: every object of science can be
uniquely characterized within its object domain through mere structure
statements (14, 15). Hence it is in principle possible to transform all statements of science into structure statements; indeed, this transformation is
necessary if science is to advance from the subjective to the objective: all
genuine science is structural science 28 (16).

.

B. Survey of the Object Types and Their Relations (17-25)
In order to obtain a preliminary, very rough, division, we distinguish physical, psychological, and cultural, objects. The expressions "physical" and
" ~ s ~ c h ~ l o g i c aare
l " here taken in their customary sense; by "cultural" objects we mean objects of the cultural sciences (or Geisteswissenschaften):
cultural or sociological events, states and entities (18, 23). The psychophysical relation is the relation between a psychological process and the parallel
process in the nervous system. The expression relation is the relation between

"Strukturwissenschaft

44

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

a motion, a facial expression, or a vocal utterance of a person, and the psychological process which can be recognized in this utterance. The designation relation is the relation between a physical sign (written symbol, sound,
badge, etc.) and that which is designated (19). For each relation there
arises a correlation problem (which objects have this relation to one another?) and an essence problem (what is the nature of the relation? what is
it that connects the correlated objects? (20). To investigate the correlation
problems of the relations mentioned above is part of the task of science
(namely of psychology and physiology; psychology and characterology; and
various branches of semiotics, respectively). On the other hand, the solution of the essence problems of those relations does not consist in the ascertainment of facts, but in their interpretation; it is not a task of science. This
is already indicated in the fact that various contradictory solutions have been
proffered between which no (conceivable) experience could decide. Hence
essence problems must be transferred from science to metaphysics; this is
particularly obvious with the psychophysical problem (21, 22).
The psychological events in which a cultural object (cultural event) appears are called the latter's manifestations; the physical objects in which a
cultural object is reflected are called its documentations. The correlation
problem of these two relations is investigated in the cultural sciences, while
the essence problem is again to be referred to metaphysics (24). The three
indicated object types are merely the most important examples; there is a
large number of other autonomous object types (25).

PART THREE

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE
CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

CHAPTER

THE ASCENSZON FORMS

26. The Four Main Problems of Construction Theory
The aim of construction theory consists in formulating a constructional
system, i.e., a stepwise ordered system of objects (or concepts). The
stepwise ordering is a result of the fact that the objects on each level are
''constructed" from the objects of the lower levels in a sense to be made
precise later. In the formation of such a system, the following four main
problems are encountered. To begin with, a basis must be chosen, a lowest level upon which all others are founded. Secondly, we must determine the recurrent forms through which we ascend from one level to
the next. Thirdly, we must investigate how the objects of various types
can be constructed through repeated applications of the ascension forms.
The fourth question concerns the over-all form of the system as it results
from the stratified arrangement of the object types. We call these four
problems the problems of basis, ascension form, object form, and system
form. The problems of basis, object form, and system form are closely
connected with one another. Their solutions are dependent upon one
another, since the construction of the objects, and thus the form of the
system, depends upon the choice of the basis, while the basis is chosen
so as to allow the construction of all object types from it. On the other

48

(

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE W O R L D

hand, the problem of the ascension forms depends less upon the efficacy
which we require of the system as a whole and is also less complicated.
While the basis of the system consists of extralogical entities which must
be chosen from an unlimited number of candidates, the ascension forms
must be chosen from a small number of logical forms, no matter what
the content of the system. These forms will result from the concepts of
a construction and of a logical complex. Of course, it is not antecedently
obvious that one can make do with ascension forms as simple and as
few in number (namely, two) as we maintain. This result will follow
from later considerations concerning definition as a form of construction ( ยง ยง 38-40). A confirmation of this view can only be found in the
actual formation of the constructional system itself (Part IV).
The problems of the basis, the object forms, and the system form will
be dealt with in the later chapters of this part (B-D), where we must
take into account empirical facts, nameIy, the properties and relations
of objects which are investigated in the special sciences. Subsequently
we shall consider the symbolic and linguistic forms which will be used
to represent the constructional system (Chapter E). Here (in Chapter
A), the formal-logical problem of the ascension forms is to be resolved.

27. The Quasi Objects
We can divide (linguistic) signs into those which have independent
meaning and those which have meaning only in connection with other
signs. Strictly speaking, only those (mostly complex) signs which designate a proposition, i.e., sentences, have independent meaning. Among
the signs which are not themselves sentences and which occur in science
only as parts of sentences, we wish to distinguish the so-called proper
names, i.e., signs which designate a definite concrete individual object
(e.g., "Napoleon", "moon") from the other parts of sentences. The
traditional view is that the proper names have a relatively independent
meaning and are thereby distinguished from the other signs. These other
signs we call, after Frege, incomplete s y r n b ~ k r . ~ ~
It should be noted that this distinction is not logically precise. We
make it to follow an established tradition and shall not attempt to give a
more precise definition of the concept of "proper name". Perhaps there
is only a difference in degree and the choice of a boundary line is arbitrary; at least, this seems to be the upshot of the later discussions on
individual and general objects (1 158).
29

ungesattigte Zeichen

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

49

In the original usage of signs, the subject position of a sentence must
always be occupied by a proper name. However, it proved advantageous
to admit into the subject position also signs for general objects and,
finally, also other incomplete symbols. This improper use, however, is permissible only when a transformation into proper use is possible, i.e., if
the sentence can be translated into one or more sentences which have
only proper names in their subject positions. More about this later. Thus,
in improper use, incomplete symbols are used if they designated an abject
in the same way as an object name. One even speaks of "their designata",
consciously or unconsciously introducing the fiction that there are such
things. We wish to retain this fiction for reasons of utility. But, in order
to remain perfectly aware of this fictional character, we will not say that
an incomplete symbol designates an "object", but that it designates a
quasi object. (In our view, even the so-called "general objects", e.g., "a
dog" or "dogs" are already quasi objects.)
EXAMPLES. If, for example, "Fido" and "Caro" are proper names
of dogs, then the sentences "Fido is a dog" and "Caro is a dog" have
the common constituent ". . . is a dog". This is an incomplete symbol
(a propositional function, cf. 128). Analogously, one finds as the
common constituent of other sentences ". . . is a cat". This shares with
the previous one the constituent ". . . is . . .", while the remainders
". . . a dog" and ". . . a cat" remain as incomplete symbols of a different sort. Let us now try to express the fact that all dogs are mammals. If we wanted to retain the sentence form ". . . is . . .", where
the subject position is properly occupied by an object name, we would
have to form the following complicated sentence: "it holds for all
values of variable x that "x is a dog" implies "x is a mammal". Instead, we form a new sentence form by allowing ourselves to introduce
an incomplete symbol into the subject position as if it were an object
name. We say, "A dog is a mammal." In this sentence, no object name
occurs, but we say about the incomplete symbol "a dog" that, while it
does not designate an object, it designates a quasi object (since it
occupies a position in the sentence as if it designated an object).
If we want to get a more precise grasp of the indicated relations, then
we will have to replace by logical symbols alI those parts of the sentences which designate not extralogical entities, but logical relations.
The meaning of these symbols becomes apparent through a comparison
with the above-mentioned sentences ("logistic formulation of the logical
skeleton," 1 46). To begin with, we have the sentences, "Fido e dog",
"Caro e dog", then the incomplete symbols ". . . dog" and ". . . 8
cat" (or "X e dog", and "x r cat"); these designate propositional func-

50

1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E W O R L D

tions. Furthermore, we have the incomplete symbols "dog" and "cat",
which designate classes. In the sentence "dog C mammal", the class
symbol is used like an object name. (About C , cf. J 33.) Since all class
symbols are introduced for precisely this purpose, it follows that all
classes are quasi objects ( 1 3 3 ) .
The form of the sentence "dog c mammal", as containing no object
symbols, only class symbols, can be justified only through the fact that
it can be transformed into a sentence in which only proper names occur
in the subject position, namely, into the above-mentioned sentence with
variable x. Further investigation would show that the classes "dog" and
"mammal" are complexes of individual animals ( 1 36).
The "objects" of science are almost without exception quasi objects.
Present-day nominalism would find this quite acceptable if it held merely
for general concepts (cf. $ 5), but it also holds for most individual
objects of scientific investigation, as construction theory will show (cf.
5 158 about individual and general objects).
The two ascension forms of construction which will be used in our
system and which will b e discussed in the sequel are forms of quasi

objects.
REFERENCES. The theory of the incomplete symbols originated
with Frege [Funktion], [Grundges.] I, 5; Russell gives extensive comments [Princ, Math.] I, 69 ff., [Math. Phil.] 182 ff. As indicated, our
position is even more radical, but we cannot give a full account of the
matter at this time.
The position which treats general objects as quasi objects is closely
related to nominalism. It must be emphasized, however, that this position concerns only the problem of the logical function of symbols
(words) which designate general objects. The question whether these
designata have reality (in the metaphysical sense) is not thereby answered in the negative, but is not even posed (cf. VD).

28. Propositional Functions
If we delete from a sentence one o r more object names (i.e., at first
proper names, but then also names of quasi objects), then we say of
the remaining incomplete symbol that it designates a propositional f ~ m c tion. By introducing the deleted names as arguments into the blanks (the
argument positions), we regain the original sentence. But, in order to
produce some sentence, either true o r false, we d o not have to introduce
precisely the deleted names, but can take others as long as they make
sense together with the incomplete symbol. W e call them permissible
arguments of the propositional function. Instead of leaving the argument

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 51

positions empty, it is better to mark them with the sign of a variable.
If the introduction of an object results in a true sentence, then we say
that this object satisfies the propositional function. All other objects, as
long as they are permissible arguments, result in a false sentence. A propositional function with precisely one argument position we call a property
o r property concept. All objects which satisfy this function "have" the
property o r "fall under" the (property) concept. A propositional function with two o r more argument positions we call a (two-place o r manyplace) relation or a relational concept. Of the pairs, triples, etc., which
satisfy this function, we say that the relation "holds for them" o r "obtains" between them or the objects "stand in this relation" to one another.
Thus every propositional function represents a concept, viz., either a
property or a relation.
EXAMPLES: Propositional functions: a. Property. From the sentence "Berlin is a city in Germany" results, by deletion of the subject
term "Berlin", a propositional function with one argument position,
namely, ". . . is a city in Germany" or "x is a city in Germany". It
represents the property of being a city in Germany, or, more briefly, the
concept "city in Germany". This incomplete symbol is turned into a
true sentence by substituting the name "Hamburg", into a false sentence
through substitution of the name "Paris", while substituting the word
"moon" produces a meaningless string of words. Thus we say that
Hamburg, but not Paris, falls under the concept "city in Germany";
while the object moon neither does nor does not fall under this concept,
for the moon is not, unlike Berlin and Paris, a permissible argument
of the function.
b. Relation. From the sentence "Berlin is a city in Germany" results,
by deletion of the two object names "Berlin" and "Germany", a propositional function with two argument positions, namely, ". . . is a city
in . . ." or "x is a city in y". It represents the two-place relation between a city and the country in which this city lies. This incomplete
symbol is turned into a true sentence by substituting the pair of names
"Munich, Germany", into a false sentence through substitution of the
words "Munich, England", and into a meaningless string of words by
substituting the words "moon, Germany". Thus, Munich stands to Germany, but not to England, in the indicated relation, while one may not
assert either that the relation holds, or that it does not hold, for the pair
"moon, Germany".

29. Zsogeny; Object Spheres
Two objects (and this always includes quasi objects) are said t o be
isogenous if there is an argument position in any propositional function

52

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

for which the two object names are permissible arguments. If this is the
case, then it holds for any argument position of any propositional function either that both names are permissible arguments, o r that neither
of them is. This is a consequence of the logical theory of types, which
we cannot here discuss in detail. If two objects are not isogenous, then
they are termed allogeneous.
EXAMPLES. In Example a) of the preceding section, Hamburg and
Paris turned out to be isogenous; the moon, on the other hand, was allogeneous relative to both Hamburg and Paris. In Example b), Berlin and
Munich showed themselves to be isogenous, and also Germany and
England. "Moon, Germany" was not a permissible pair of arguments.
From this it does not follow that neither of them is a permissible argument for the position in question, but that at least one of them is not.
Since Germany was a permissible argument for its position, it follows
that the moon is not a permissible argument. Thus the moon is allogeneous relative to both Berlin and Munich.
By the sphere of an object we mean the class of all objects which are
isogenous with the given object. (Since isogeny is transitive, the object
spheres are mutually exclusive.) If every object of a given object type is
isogenous with every object of another object type, then we call the
object types themselves "isogenous". Correspondingly, we also speak of
"allogeneous" object types. For pure object types, these are the only
possible cases; that is to say, we call an object type pure, if all its objects
are isogenous with one another, i.e., if the type is a subclass of an object
sphere. All other types we call impure. Only the pure types are logically
unobjectionable concepts; only they have classes as extensions (cf.
$ 32 f.). However, in the practical pursuit of science the impure types
play an important role. Thus the main object types, namely, the physical,
the psychological, and the cultural are impure types, as we shall see.

30. "Confusion o f Spheres" as a Source o f Error
If we wish to test whether or not two objects are isogenous, and if the
statements about these objects are expressed in a word language, then
we have to ascertain ultimately whether or not a string of words forms
a meaningful sentence. This test frequently becomes quite complicated
through a special sort of ambiguity of language. This ambiguity is frequently overlooked and has thereby caused considerable philosophical
difiicuIties; in particular, it has very markedly retarded progress in the
task with which we are presently concerned, namely, the formation of a

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

53

conceptual system, and it complicates this task even now. We are here
not concerned with straightforward ambiguity (homonymy) as it occurs,
e.g., in such words as "cock", "spring", etc., nor with somewhat more
subtle ambiguities as they occur in many expressions of ordinary life,
of science and of philosophy, as, for example, in the words "representation", "value", "objective", "idea", etc. In our daily lives, we are well
aware of the first type of ambiguity, while in philosophy we concern
ourselves with the second, and we can thus avoid at least the more obvious mistakes. Let me explain, by way of example, the third type of ambiguity, the one which concerns us here. The expression "thankful" seems
unambiguous when it is taken in its root sense (i.e., setting aside any
use of the term in a metaphorical sense; this would fall under the second
type of ambiguity considered above, e.g., when "thankful" is used relative to a task or work). However, we not only say of a person that he is
thankful, but also of his character, of a look, of a letter, of a people.
Now each of these five objects belongs to a different sphere. It follows
from the theory of types that the properties of objects which belong to
m e r e n t spheres themselves belong to different spheres. Thus, there are
five concepts, "thankful", which belong to different spheres, the confusion of which would lead to contradictions. However, generally speaking,
there is no danger that we might draw an invalid conclusion since precisely the fact that these objects are of difEerent spheres keeps us from
misunderstanding which of the five concepts is meant. In general, using
only one word for these diierent objects is innocuous, and therefore useful and justifiable. This ambiguity must be noted only if finer distinctions
between concepts are to be made, distinctions which are important for
epistemological and metaphysical problems. Neglect of the difference
between concepts of M e r e n t spheres, we call confusion of spheres.
REFERENCES. There has been no explicit recognition of the indicated type of ambiguity in logic. But it bears a certain resemblance to
the multiplicity of "suppositions" of a word which the Schoolmen used
to distinguish; cf. Erdmann [Bedeutung] 66 ff. It is more closely related
to the theory of types which Russell has developed in order to overcome
the logical paradoxes and which he has utilized in his logistic system
nypes], [Princ. Math.], I, 39 ff., 168 ff., [Math. Phil.] 133 ff., cf. Carnap [Logistik] f 9. However, Russell has applied this theory only to
formal-logical structures, not to a system of concrete concepts (more
precisely: only to variables and logical constants, not to nonlogical constants). Our object spheres are Russell's "types" applied to extralogical
concepts. Thus, the justification for making a distinction between the

54

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

various object spheres and for claiming that there were five concepts,
"thankful", in the preceding example is derived from the theory of
types, even though the examples may not have sounded very persuasive
since they were given in a word language. Although the theory of types
is not generally accepted, none of its opponents has been able to produce a logical system which could avoid the contradictions (the socalled paradoxes) from which the older logic suffers, without using a
theory of types.
That the indicated ambiguity can become a source of error in the investigation of isogeny is obvious from a n inspection of the five objects
of which thankfulness can b e asserted and which one could erroneously
presume to be isogenous on the basis of the criterion of 3 29. The following example will make the matter more clear.

3 1. An Application
EXAMPLE. Let us investigate, to begin with, which objects are isogenous with a (definite, particular) stone. Sentences about this stone
would be, for example, "The stone is red", "The stone weighs 5 kg.",
"The stone lies in Switzerland", "The stone is hard". These sentences
are unquestionably meaningful; it makes no difference whether they are
true or false. Now we must substitute in these sentences the names of
the objects we want to test, and must ascertain whether or not the
sentences still have a meaning. It is of no concern whether the sentences
become true or false. If we wish to apply the test to another stone or
to a chicken, we will find that meaningful sentences result. Thus these
objects are isogenous with the fist stone (if we were to continue our
investigation, we should find that they all belong to the sphere of physical bodies). On the other hand, the following list of objects which begins
with the stone, does not contain any further object which is isogenous
with the stone, for in no case do we obtain a meaningful sentence when
we substitute the appropriate name for the name of the stone.
List of representative objects: (physical 30 objects) : a particular
stone, aluminum; (psychological objects) : a (certain, particular) worry,
the vivacity of Mr. N.; (cultural objects) : the constitution of the Reich,
expressionism; (biological objects) : the Mongolian race, heredity of
acquired traits; (mathematical and logical objects): the Pythagorean
theorem, the number 3; (phenomenal 31 objects) : the color green, a
certain melody; (objects of physics 32): the electrical elementary quanphysisch
sinnesphinomenologisch
physikalische Gegenstande

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF TIIE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

55

tum, the melting point of ice; (ethical object) : the categorical imperative; (temporal object) : the present day.
The following cases will show how the above-mentioned ambiguity
(confusion of spheres) renders more difficult the test for isogeny and
increases the likelihood of error: the sentences, "The stone is hard" and
"The stone is red" seem to be meaningful also for aluminum, i.e., the
first sentence true and the second false. Only the realization that the
other two sentences about the stone ("It weighs 5 kg.", "It lies in
Switzerland") are meaningless for aluminum shows that the two objects
belong to different spheres. This leads to a more detailed investigation
of the matter and leads to the recognition that the properties "red" and
"hard" relative to a thing are not the same as the properties "red" and
"hard" relative to a substance.
T h e example shows that it is frequently necessary to consider several
different sentences in testing isogeny, Otherwise, one may be misled by
the fact that words are frequently impure as far as spheres are concerned.
A more detailed investigation of the above list of objects would show
that the indicated objects all beIong to different spheres. One can show
this for the first object, the stone, by means of the above-stated four
sentences. W e have already seen that some of these sentences seem to
indicate isogeny with other objects o n the list. Taken together, however,
they show that the stone does not belong to the same sphere with any
of the objects mentioned subsequently. There is no other object name
o n the list which would result even in apparently meaningful sentences
in all four cases. The test for every other object o n the list could be
carried out accordingly.
The fact that the objects o n the list belong to different object spheres
means that each of them represents a different object sphere. Now the
list can easily b e extended at will in such a way that all further objects
are also all from different spheres; thus we see that the number of different object spheres is large. A t the moment, there is no way of telling
whether this number is finite. I n other words, not only is the number of
object types which are coordinated with one another (e.g., as the species
in a classification) very large, but also the number of object types which
are toto coelo different from one another. (They are toto coelo different
from one another in that each of them has its own coelum, its own object
sphere.)
I n the list of objects given above, several object types are represented
by more than one object. Since these objects are not isogenous, this
means that these object types are impure. I t holds almost without e x c e p

56

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 THE LOGICAL STAUCTUAE OF THE W O R L D

tion that the traditional object types which are found in the sciences are
almost always impure, i.e., they are not logically permissible concepts
(e-g., physical, psychological, etc.).

32. The Extension of a Propositional Function
If two propositional functions stand to one another in such a relation
that every object (or couple, triple, etc.) which satisfies the first also
satisfies the second, then we say that the first universally implies the
second. If two propositional functions stand to one another in a relation
of mutual universal implication, then they are called universally equivalent or coextensive. Hence, coextensive propositional functions are satisfied by exactly the same arguments. If we assign the same symbol to
propositional functions that are coextensive and if we from then on use
only these new symbols, then we obviously disregard all points of difference between coextensive propositional functions and express only those
factors in which they agree. Such a procedure we call an extensional
procedure; the symbols which are the same for all coextensive propositional functions we call extension symbols. They have no independent
meaning and they may be used only if we indicate for all sentence forms
in which they are to be used how such sentences may be transformed
into sentences in which extension symbols no longer occur; thus, in
translating back, we replace these symbols by the appropriate propositional functions (more precisely, each extension symbol is replaced by
any one of the coextensive propositional functions to which it was
assigned). The extension symbols have no independent meaning, i.e.,
they are incomplete symbols (to an even higher degree than propositional functions). Nevertheless, in conformity with the customary usage,
we speak of them as if there were objects which they designate. These
objects we call extensions. Thus, extensions, too, are quasi objects. For
example, we say of two coextensive propositional functions that they
have the same extension (hence the word "coextensive"), since they have
assigned to them the same extension symbol. Furthermore, if there are
two propositional functions which are so related that each object (couple,
triple, etc.) which satisfies the first also satisfies the second, then it is
easily seen that the relation of universal implication is also fulfilled if
each of these two propositional functions is replaced by another, coextensive, one. It is for this reason that we can express this relation with
the aid of extension symbols; the symbol C between two extension symbols is defined as indicating the universal implication between the corre-

1

57

sponding propositional functions. If we now speak again as if there were
objects which are designated by extension symbols, we may say the
sentence "a C b" means "(the extension) a is contained in (the extension) b." We call this relation between two extensions inclusion or
subsumption.
Given a propositional function, we form a symbol for its extension by
enclosing the propositional function in parentheses and by writing in
front of it the appropriate variables with accents: f y ( . . . x . . . y
.).We shall give examples during the following discussion of the two
kinds of extensions, namely, classes and relation extensions.

..

33. Classes
The extension of a propositional function with only one argument position, i.e., the extension of a property, is called a c h s . Thus, coextensive
properties have the same class. An object o which satisfies a given propositional function is called an element of the corresponding class, call it a.
(In symbols, o a ) ; o "belongs to" class a (not "is included in"!). If a
class a is included in class b (in the above-defined sense of subsumption),
then a is called a subclass of b (in symbols: a C b ) .
Let me briefly discuss some main concepts of the theory of classes.
The class of objects which do not belong to a certain class a is called the
"negate" or "complement" of a (in symbols, - a ) . -a, of course, does
not comprise all remaining objects, but only the permissible but not
satisfying arguments. To the "intersection" of two classes (a r l b) belong all those objects which are elements of both a and b. To the
"union" of two classes (a IJ b) belong those objects which are elements
of at least one of them. The union of a class with its complement forms
the object sphere of elements of this class, for it comprises all permissible
arguments of the correspondingpropositional function.
Classes, since they are extensions, are quasi objects. Thus the class
symbols do not have independent meaning; they are merely aids for
making statements about all the objects which satisfy a given propositional function without having to enumerate them one by one. Thus the
class symbol represents, as it were, that which these objects, i.e., the elements of that class, have in common.

EXAMPLE.Let us assume, for example, that the propositional function " x is a man" is satisfied by the same objects as the propositional
function "x is a rational animal" and "x is a featherless biped." Thus

53

1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E W O R L D

these three propositional functions are coextensive, and we assign to
them the same extension symbol, e.g., ma (i.e., we define: ma = 3 ( x
is a man), cf. 1 32). Since this is a propositional function with only
one argument position, ma is a class symbol. Moreover, ma is an incomplete symbol; by itself it means nothing, but the sentences in which
it occurs have meaning, since it is clear how this class symbol can be
eliminated from them. For example, the sentence "d c ma" can be transformed into the sentence "d is a man" or "d is a featherle3s biped".
Even though ma itself does not designate anything, one speaks of "the
designatum of ma" as if it were an object. We want to be somewhat
more cautious and call it a quasi object. It is "the class of all men",
i.e., the extension of the propositional function " x is a man".

,,

We must emphasize the fact that classes are quasi objects in relation
to their elements, and that they belong to different spheres. This is important because a class is frequently confounded with the whole that
consists of the elements of that class. These wholes, however, are not
quasi objects relative to their parts, but are isogenous with them. We
shall discuss the difference between classes and wholes, and the fact that
elements belong to different spheres from their classes, more thoroughly
in the sequel ( 8 37).
REFERENCES. The theory of propositional functions and their extensions originated with Frege [Funktion] [Grundges.] (Frege call5
them Wertverlaufe) and was utilized by Whitehead and Russell in their
system of logistics ([Princ. Math.], cf. also [Math. Phil.], 157ff.). A
good exposition is also found in Keyser [Math. Phil.] 49 ff.; Keyscr
gives an interesting elaboration of the concept of a propositional funrtion in the form of his "doctrinal function" ("Theoriefunktion", 58 ff.).
Cf. Carnap [Logistik] 5 8.
Frege has already shown that extension symbols, and thus the clasp
symbols, are incomplete symbols (cf. the quotations in $27). According to Russell, it is irrelevant for logic whether or not there are actual
objects which are designated by class symbols, since classes are not
defined by themselves, but only in the context of total sentences ("no
class theory"). More recently, Russell has expressed himself even more
strongly and has called classes logical fictions or symbolic fictions [External W.] 206 ff., [Math. Phil.] 182 ff. This corresponds to our notion
of classes as quasi objects. Furthermore, according to Russell, classes are
sharply distinguished from their elements in that no statement can be
meaningful for a class (i.e., either true or false), if it is meaningful for
one of its elements (theory of types). This corresponds to our notion
that classes and their elements belong to different spheres (1 37).

1

34. Relation Extensions
The extension of a propositional function with several argument positions, i.e., of a relation " is called a relation extension.34 Thus relation
extensions stand in exact formal analogy to classes which are the extensions of propositional functions with only one argument position, i.e.,
properties. Hence we can here be somewhat briefer, since by virtue of the
analogy some points will be clear without further explanation. Like
classes, relation extensions are quasi objects.
Coextensive relations correspond to the same relation extension. A
pair of objects x, y (the same holds for triples, quadruples, etc.) which
satisfies a given propositional function and thus all propositional functions coextensive with it is called an ordered pair (or triple, etc.) of the
relation extension which corresponds to the propositional function (xQy,
where Q designates the relation extension). Since it is not generally permissible to interchange the argument positions of a propositional function, the different members of an ordered pair (or triple, etc.) must be
differentiated. In an ordered pair (i.e., in the case of a two-place relation
extension), we call them referent and relatum. Relation extensions have
the capacity to produce order, and this capacity derives from the diierentiation between their various argument positions. Hence the importance
of the theory of relations for the exhibition of order in any subject area
whatever.
Relation extensions are quasi objects. Nevertheless, in order to aid
intuition, language treats them as if they were a third thing which is
suspended between the two members. Through this rescation, the linguistic expression becomes more graphic, and it is not often dangerous
since we are for the most part conscious of it as a figurative and improper
mode of speech. For the sake of simplicity, we follow common usage in
this case as well and use symbols of relation extensions as if they were
names of objects, but, in order to emphasize the improper mode of expression, we call them quasi objects.
Let us briefly indicate some main concepts of the elementary theory
of relations. The class of the possible referents of a relation extension Q
is called the "domain" of Q (in symbols: DQ). The class of possible
relata is called the "converse domain" (DQ). If domain and converse
domain are isogenous with one another, then the relation extension is
Beziehung

''Relation

80

(

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

called homogeneous; in this case there exists a union of domain and
converse domain, called the field of Q (C'Q). The relation extension
which holds for all Q pairs in opposite direction is called the converse
of Q (0).
If aPb and bQc both hold, then there is a relation extension
for a and c, called the relative product of P and Q (PIQ). Powers of
relations: R2 means RIR, R3 means R21R, etc. R,, means the union of
the powers (power relation or chain) ;Ro means identity in the field of R.
The concepts of symmetry, reflexivity, transitivity, and connectedness
have been explained above ( ยง 11). A relation extension is called onemany if, for each relatum, there exists only one referent; it is called manyone if, for each referent, there exists only one relatum. If both conditions
are fulfilled, it is called one-one.
A relation extension R is called a correlator between two relation extensions P and Q if it establishes a one-one correspondence between the
elements of P and the elements of Q such that to each pair of P there
corresponds a pair of Q and vice versa. If such a conelator exists for
two relation extensions P and Q, then P and Q are called isomorphic or
of the same structure. This corresponds to our earlier graphic definition
of structural equivalence with the aid of the arrow diagram. We now can
give an exact definition of the structure or relation number 35 of a relation extension P: it is the class of relation extensions which are isomorphic to P. (Cf. the analogous definition of cardinal number, $ 40.)

35. Reducibility and Construction
Above ( $ 2), we have explained the concept of reducibility with the aid
of the imprecise concept of the "transformation" of a statement. We must
now indicate more precisely what is to be meant by a "transformation".
To this end we can now utilize the concept of coextensiveness (or universal equivalence) of propositional functions ( $ 32). We say that a
proposition or propositional function is "exclusively about objects a, b,
if, in its written expression, there appear as extralogical symbols
only "a", "b", . . .; logical constants ( $ 107) and general variables may
also occur. If for each propositional function which is exclusively about
objects a, b, c (where b, c, . . may be absent) there exists a coextensive propositional function exclusively about b, c, . then a is said
to be reducible to b, c, . . Thus we can say more briefly but with less
precision that an object is said to be "reducible" to others, if all statements about it can be translated into statements which speak only about
these other objects.

. . ."

.

.

85

Relationszahl

. .

1

61

In the simplest and most important case the object to be reduced
occurs alone and without the other objects in the propositional function
in question.
EXAMPLE. "x is a prime number" is coextensive with " x is a natural
number whose only divisors are 1 and x itself". The object (or concept)
prime number is thereby reduced to these objects: natural number, 1,
divisor.

The previously explained concept of a construction ( 8 2) must now
likewise be more precisely determined. By constructing a concept from
other concepts, we shall mean the indication of its "constructional definition" on the basis of these other concepts. By a constructional definition
of the concept a on the basis of concepts b and c, we mean a rule of
translation which gives a general indication how any propositional function in which a occurs may be transformed into a coextensive propositional function in which a no longer occurs, but only b and c. In the
simplest case, such a translation rule will consist in the prescription to
replace a in all its occurrences by a certain expression in which only b
and c occur ("explicit" definition).
If a concept is reducible to others, then it must indeed be possible in
principle to construct it from them. However, if one knows that a concept
is so reducible, one does not thereby know how it is constructed, since
the formulation of a general transformation rule for all statements about
this concept is a separate problem.
EXAMPLE. The reducibility of fractions to natural numbers is easily
understood, and a given statement about certain fractions can easily be
transformed into a statement about natural numbers (cf. 5 2). On the
other hand, the construction, for example, of the fraction 2/7, i.e., the
indication of a rule through which all statements about 2/7 can be
transformed into statements about 2 and 7, is much more complicated
(cf. 5 40). Whitehead and Russell have solved this problem for all
mathematical concepts [Princ. Math.]; thus they have produced a "constructional system" of the mathematical concepts.

36. Complex and Whole
If an object is logically reducible to others, then we call it a logical complex or, in brief, a complex of these other objects, which we shall call its
elements. According to what we have said above ( $ 5 33, 341, classes
a d relation extensions are examples of complexes.
If an object stands to other objects in a relation such that they are its
parts relative to an extensive medium, e.g., space or time, then we call

62

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF TIIE WORLD

the first object the extensive whole or, in brief, the whole of the other
objects. The whole consists of its parts.
The difference between a complex and a whole must not be confounded with the difference between a "true whole" ("organic whole",
"Gestalt") and "(mere) collection" (or "sum"); the second distinction
is important for psychology and biology, but is not of the same fundamental importance for construction theory as the first one, since it is
merely a differentiation between two types of wholes. Moreover, it is
doubtful whether this second distinction is not actually a mere difference
in degree, i.e., whether it is not perhaps the case that all wholes have, to
more or less high degree, all properties which are generally attributed
only to "true wholes". Perhaps there are no mere collections at all. However, no final decision can be made in this matter, since so far no sufficiently precise definition of true whole and Gestalt is available.
REFERENCES. Driesch ([Ordnungsl.] [Ganze] esp. 4) differentiates
the whole (in the sense of the true or organic whole) from the sum by
saying that it loses essential properties if a part is taken away from it.
Gestalt theory is concerned with entities which are characterized by
the fact that "properties and functions of a part depend upon its position in the whole to which it belongs" (Kohler [Gestaltprobl.] 514; cf.
also Wertheimer [Gestaltth.]). The close connection between the two
definitions is obvious; examples which fall under both definitions are:
an organism as the whole of its members, a melody as the whole of its
tones, a house as the whole of its stones. On the other hand, it is very
difficult to find an example of a mere collection; even a stone as the
collection of its molecules and a heap of stones as the collection of its
stones are true wholes. It is questionable whether, for example, the
totality of all the iron on earth could be called a mere collection.

To be sure, the concepts whole and complex are not mutually exclusive; but construction theory is especially concerned with those complexes which do not consist of their elements, as a whole consists of its
parts. Such complexes we call autonomous complexes. Thus we differentiate a whole from an autonomous complex by the fact that in the former
the elements are parts in the extensive sense; in the latter, they are not.
From the definition of construction and complex, it follows that, if an
object is constructed from other objects, then it is a complex of them.
Thus all objects o f a constructional system are complexes o f the basic
objects o f the system.
If we are concerned with a statement about a quasi object, i.e., a statement which is expressed in the form of a sentence in which an incomplete

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

63

symbol occurs in a position where the sentence structure originally allows
only an object name, then this use of the incomplete symbol must be
defined; it must be possible to translate this sentence into another sentence, where we find only proper object names in argument (e.g., subject)
positions. From this it follows that a quasi object which belongs to a certain object domain is always a complex of the objects of this domain; i.e.,
it is an autonomous complex and not the whole of its elements. For a
whole is an object of the same object type as its elements. Since classes
are quasi objects relative to their elements, it follows that they are autonomous complexes of these elements (cf. 5 37); relation extensions are
likewise autonomous complexes of their members.

37. A Class Does Not Consist o f Its Elements
We say of a class and of a whole that they "correspond" to one another
when the parts of the whole are the elements of the class. Since a whole
can be divided into parts in various ways, there are always many classes
which correspond to one whole. On the other hand, to each class there
corresponds at most one whole, for the elements are uniquely determined
through the class, and two objects which consist of the same parts are
identical. Now, if a class were to consist of its elements (i.e., if it were
identical with the whole that corresponds to it), then all those many
classes which correspond to the same whole would be identical with one
another. But, as we have seen, they are m e r e n t from one another. Thus,
classes cannot consist o f their elements as a whole consists o f its parts.
Classes are quasi objects relative to their elements; they are complexes
of their elements, and, since they do not consist of these elements, they
are autonomous complexes of their elements.
The same holds for the mathematical concept of a set, which corresponds to the logical concept of a class. A set, too, does not consist of its
elements. This is important to notice, since the character of a whole or a
collection (or of an "aggregate") has erroneously been connected with
the concept of a set ever since its inception (i.e., ever since Cantor's
definition). In set theory itself, this notion does not generally have any
consequences, but it seems to be the reason that the methodologically
most advantageous and logically unobjectionable form of definition for
the concept of power (or cardinal number), one of the central concepts
of set theory, is frequently opposed (cf. ยง 41 ) .
EXAMPLE. One can envisage the organs or the cells or the atoms
as parts of the whole dog. On the other hand, the class of the organs of

64

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

the dog, the class of its cells, the class of its atoms, are three different
classes, each with different elements. Each of them has a different cardinality; consequently, they cannot be identical. All these different
classes correspond to the whole which is the dog. Since these classes
are not identical with one another, they can also not be identical with
the whole which is the dog. They are of the same logical status because
the various different partitions are of the same logical status; thus, it
also cannot be that at least one of the classes is identical with the whole.
REFERENCES. Frege has already expressed very clearly the thesis
of this section. "The extension of a concept does not consist of the
objects which fall under the concept." w i t . ] 455. Russell has made
the same point by calling attention to unit classes and null classes
[Math. Phil.] 184. Cf. also the very pertinent remarks of Weyl
[Handb.] 11.
Thus, not only is it not the case that a class is identical with the whole
corresponding to it; it even belongs to a diierent sphere. As we have
seen, extensions are quasi objects relative to their elements. Thus we see
that it is part of the logical doctrine that an extension cannot be a permissible argument for the same argument position of the propositional function for which its elements are permissible arguments. Nothing can be
asserted of a class that can be asserted of its elements, and nothing can
be asserted of a relation extension that can be asserted of its members.
(The well-known theorem of logic, that one cannot say of a class either
that it does, or that it does not, belong to itself, is only a special case
of this.)
Since a whole is isogenous with its parts while a class does not belong
to the same sphere as its elements, it follows that a class is allogeneous
to the whole that corresponds to it.
EXAMPLE. The difference between a wall as the whole of its
bricks and the class of these bricks becomes especially clear through
the fact that the wall is, but the class is not, isogenous with the bricks.
This follows from an application of the criterion which employs propositional functions (129). The propositional functions " x is made of burnt
clay", " x is rectangular", " x is hard", are satisfied by a brick as well as
by the wall; the propositional functions " x is of one color", " x is (spatially) small" are satisfied by a brick, and either they or their negations
are satisfied by the wall. At any rate, for all five propositional functions, brick and wall are permissible arguments. On the other hand, the
class of bricks is not a permissible argument for any of these propositional functions. It is a permissible argument for the propositional func-

TIIE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 65

tion " x has the cardinal number loo", "x is a subclass of the class of
bricks in general"; for these, neither the wall nor a brick is a permissible argument.

38. Construction Takes Place Through Definition
If, in the course of the formation of the constructional system, a new
object is "constructed", then this means, according to our definition of
construction, that it is shown how statements about it can be transformed
into statements about the basic objects of the system or the objects which
have been constructed prior to the object in question. Thus a rule must
be given which enables us to eliminate the name of the new object in all
sentences in which it could occur; in other words, a definition of the
name of the object must be given.
Now, two different cases must be distinguished. In the simpler case,
a symbol can be introduced which is composed out of already known
symbols (i.e., out of the basic symbols and other already defined ones)
such that this symbol can always be put in the place of a new object
symbol if this is to be eliminated. Here, the construction takes place by
way of an explicit definition: the new symbol is declared to have the
same meaning as the compound one. In this case, the new object is not
a quasi object relative to certain of the older objects, since what it is can
be explicitly indicated. Thus, it remains within one of the already formed
object spheres, even if we should consider it as a representative of a new
object type. We have already seen that the differentiation of types, unlike
the opposition between spheres, is not logically precise but depends upon
practical purposes of classification.
The second case arises when no explicit definition is possible. In this
case, a special kind of definition is required, namely, the so-called "definition in use".

39. Definitions in Use
If m explicit dehition is possible for an object, then its object name,
given'i. isolation, does not designate anything in the manner of already
constructed objects; in this case, we are confronted with a quasi object
relative to the already constructed objects. However, if an object is to
be called "constructed on the basis of the previous objects," then it must
nevertheless be possible to transform the propositions about it into propositions h which only the previous objects occur, even though there is no

138

I THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

symbol for this object which is composed of the symbols of the already
constructed objects. Thus we must have a translation rule which generally determines the transformation operation for the statement form
in which the new object name is to occur. In contrast to an explicit definition, such an introduction of a new symbol is called a definition in use
(definitio in usu), since it does not explain the new symbol itselfwhich, after all, does not have any meaning by itself-but only its use
in complete sentences.
REFERENCES. Cf. Russell [Princ. Math.] I, 25, 69. The expression "implicit definition" is customary for an entirely different determination of objects through axiomatic systems and should be reserved for
this purpose. (Cf. 8 15). Occasionally, when one is concerned with the
contrast between implicit and explicit definitions, both, definitions in use
and explicit definitions proper, are called "explicit definitions in the wider
sense."

In order for a translation rule to be applicable to all sentences of a
certain sentence form, it must refer to propositional functions. It must
equate with one another the expressions for two propositional functions,
one of which contains the new object name, while the other contains
only old ones, and both of which must contain the same variables. Under
these conditions, the second expression is to be considered a translation
of the first. A simple consideration shows that we have to proceed in
this way. If the expression which contains the new symbol were not to
contain any variables (i.e., if it were not the expression for a propositional function, but for a proposition, i.e., a sentence), then the rule
would not hold for different sentences, but only for this one. And if this
expression contains variables, then the translation which is prescribed by
the rule must contain the same variables, since otherwise it would not
tell us how, in the application to a sentence which is to be translated, the
object names which occur in the argument positions are to be transferred
to the new sentence.
EXAMPLES. The form of an explicit definition is probably well
enough known, but it is important that its distinction from a definition
in use should become as clear as possible. If the number 1 and the operation
are known, then the other numbers can be defined explicitly:
"2 = 1 I", "3 = 2 + I", etc. ("=,," is to be read as "equals by
definition" or "is always replaceable by").
Definition in use. Let us assume that the concepts of a natural number and of multiplication are known. The concept of prime number is
to be introduced. The expression "prime number" cannot be defined

+
,, +

,,

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF TIIE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

I

67

explicitly in the way in which we have previously defined the symbols
"2" and "3". Thus it might seem as if a definition of the following form

would be permissible: "prime numbers =, those numbers which . . ."
or "A prime number = a number which . . ." But a definition of
this form only appears explicit; this deception is brought about by the
linguistic forms which make it appear as if such expressions as "the
prime numbers" or "a prime number" designate objects, since they use
such expressions as subjects of sentences. Expressions such as "those
which . . ." or "a . . ." are already (very useful) abbreviations for
definitions in use; they correspond to the class symbols of logic. The
prime number concept is not a proper object ielative to the numbers
1, 2, 3, . . . Thus it can be defined only in use by indicating which
meaning a sentence of the form "a is a prime number" is to have,
where a is a number. This meaning must be indicated by giving a propositional function which means the same as the propositional function
"x is a prime number," and contains nothing but already known symbols, and which could thus serve as a translation rule for sentences of
the form "n is a prime number". Thus, we could define: 'k is a prime
number" =, " x is a natural number and has only 1 and x as divisors."

,,

40. The Ascension Forms: Class and Relation Extension
We have seen that the construction of an object has to take the form of
a definition. Now a constructional definition is either explicit or it is a
definition in use. In the Grst case, the object to be constructed is isogenous with some of the preceding objects (i.e., no new constructional
level is reached through it). Thus, the ascension to a new constructional
level takes place always through a definition in use. Now, every definition
in use indicates that a propositional function which is expressed with the
aid of a new symbol means the same as a propositional function which
is expressed only with the older symbols. By "same meaning", we mean
'hat both propositional functions are satisfied by the same objects. A
Propositional function which is coextensive with another one ( 4 32) is
Satisfied by the same objects as the latter; hence, in a contextual definition we can always replace the second propositional function by any
other propositional function which is coextensive with i t Thus, a propositional function which is expressed with the aid of the new symbol is
not associated with just a single, determinate, previously introduced
Propositional function f, but with all propositional functions that are coextensive with f; in other words, the new propositional function is associated with the extension of I Thus, we can interpret the new propositional

68

I

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONALSYSTEM 1 69

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

about all classes of five objects) without having to enumerate them one
by one, which, in this case, would not be practicable anyway, because
their number is infinite. Now, if cl, is a symbol which allows us to
make statements about all those properties which all classes of five
objects have in common, then what could be the difference between it
and the arithmetical sign "5" (for the cardinal number)? The cardinal
number 5 is a quasi object, just as the class cl, is; the symbol "5" does
not designate a proper object, but only serves to make statements about
those properties which all possible classes of five objects have in common. Thus, we see that the indicated definition of cardinal number does
not replace the cardinal numbers by other schematically constructed
entities, which have a certain formal analogy with cardinal numbers,
but that this definition meets precisely the arithmetical concept itself.
It is only the rarely articulated, but frequently tacit, conception of classes
as wholes or collections which has obscured this fact.
REFERENCES. Frege was the first to give the above-mentioned definition of cardinal number: [Grundlg.] 79 ff., [Grundges.] I, 57. Russell
has independently rediscovered it in 1901, and has applied it to the
foundations of mathematics: [Principles] 114, [External W.] 199 ff.,
[Math. Phil.] 11, [Princ. Math.] I.
Objections of the indicated kind were made against this definition, for
example, by: Hausdorff [Mengenl.] 46, J. Koenig [Logik] 226 note, cf.
Fraenkel [Mengenl.] 44. The earlier Russell, in his attempt to stay as
close as possible to common usage, has been guilty, in spite of his "noclass theory", of being not decisive enough in rejecting the interpretation of classes as wholes [Princ. Math.], [External W.] 126. Lately, he
has definitely emphasized the differences between a class and "a pile or
collection," in our terminology, wholes or collections [Math. Phil.] 184.
Nevertheless, he believes that, with this definition of cardinal numbers,
he has to accept an oddity, only in order to gain a definite, unambiguous concept [Math. Phil.] 18. Our conception agrees with that of Weyl
[Handb.] 11.

function purely extensionally: we introduce the new symbol as an extension symbol. Thus, through a constructional definition which leads to a
new constructional level, we always define either a class o r a relation
extension, depending upon whether the defining propositional function
has only one argument position o r whether it has several of them. Let us
illustrate both forms with examples from arithmetic.
EXAMPLE. 1. Class. The cardinal numbers (or powers) are defined
in logic as classes of equinumerous classes (or "sets"). Two classes
are said to be equinumerous if there exists a one-to-one correspondence
between them. Thus, for example, all classes which have five elements
are equinumerous; the class on the second level which has all these
classes as elements is then called the "cardinal number 5". The development of arithmetic on the basis of this definition shows that this definition is formally unobjectionable and satisfactory, since it allows us to
derive all arithmetical properties of cardinal numbers and does not lead
to contradictions. Nevertheless, there has been much opposition to this
definition, not from logical, but from easily understandable intuitive
motives. For example, the class to which supposedly belong all the
classes of five objects in the world seems to be so boundless and comprehensive that its identity with the clearly delineated arithmetical entity, the cardinal number 5, appears to be absurd. However, this illusion
rests solely upon the intuitive substitution of the class by the corresponding whole, which we have discussed above (cf. 8 37). While this
substitution is frequently useful, in this case it leads to errors. Let us return to our example: the class of the fingers of my right hand is not
the whole "my right hand", and the class of all such classes of five
objects does not consist of all hands, feet, piles of five stones, etc. This
boundless collection would of course be quite useless as an arithmetical
entity. Rather, we cannot say what the class of the fingers of my right
hand is, because this class is only a quasi object (i.e., an autonomous
complex). A symbol introduced for it would not have any meaning by
itself, but would only serve to make statements about the fingers of my
right hand, without having to enumerate these five objects one by one
(i.e., statements about that which they have in common, for example,
the properties of form, color, and matter, which these five fingers
share). Likewise, one cannot say what the class of all classes of five
objects itself is (i.e., the class of those classes, the elements of which
can be brought into a one-to-one correspondence to the elements of
the class of the fingers of my right hand). It, too, is only a quasi object
(i.e., an autonomous complex). If we introduce a symbol for it-for
example, c1,-this
symbol does not designate a proper object, but
merely serves to make statements about the elements of this class (i.e.,

EXAMPLE. 2. Relation extension. We have seen above that fractions
can be reduced to natural numbers and that they therefore must be
envisaged as complexes of natural numbers ( ยง 2). This means that
fractions are independent complexes, namely, quasi objects, for they
can be defined as relation extensions of natural numbers. For example,
"213 = i j (x and y are natural numbers, and it holds that 3x = 2y)".

,

41. The Constructional Levels

a,

in a constructional system of any kind, we carry out a step-by-step
Construction of more and more object domains by proceeding from any

70

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

set of basic objects by applying in any order the class and relation construction, then these domains, which are all in m e r e n t spheres and of
which each forms a domain of quasi objects relative to the preceding
domain, are called constructional levels. Hence, constructional levels are
object spheres which are brought into a stratified order within the constructional system by constructing some of these objects on the basis of
others. Here, the relativity of the concept "quasi object", which holds
for any object on any constructional level relative to the object on the
preceding level, is especially obvious.
It is now clear how the two seemingly contradictory theses of the unity
of the object domain ( $ 4) and the multiplicity of independent object
types ( 9 25) are to be reconciled. In a constructional system, all objects
are constructed from certain basic objects, but in step-by-step formulation.
It follows from the construction on the basis of the same basic objects
that statements about all objects are transformable into statements about
these basic objects so that, as far as the logical meaning of its statements
is concerned, science is concerned with only one domain. This is the sense
of the first thesis. On the other hand, in its practical procedures, science
does not always make use of this transformability by actually transforming all its statements. Most of the statements of science are made in the
form of statements about constructed entities, not about basic objects.
And these constructed entities belong to Werent constructional levels
which are all allogeneous to one another. As far as the logical form of
its statements is concerned, science therefore is concerned with many
autonomous object types. This is the sense of the second thesis. The
compatibility of these two theses rests on the fact that it is possible to
construct difEerent allogeneous levels from the same basic objects.

42. Being and Holding

aa

( M a y be omitted)

Following an occasionally used terminology, one could speak of the
different "modes of being" of the objects of different object spheres.
This expression is particularly apt to make clear that allogeneous objects
are completely dissimilar and cannot be compared. Fundamentally, the
difference between being and holding, of which so much has been made
in recent philosophy, goes back to the difference between object spheres,
more precisely, to the difference between proper objects and quasi
objects. For, if a quasi object is constructed on the basis of certain
s i n und Gelten
sinsarten

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM 1 71

elements, then it "holds" for these elements; thus it is distinguished as
somethiig that holds from the elements which have being. That a
relation (extension) "holds" between its members is familiar terminology; we are less accustomed to saying that a class "holds" for its elements,
though the expression could here be used with the same justification,
since the relationship is the same in both cases. Construction theory goes
beyond the customary conception of being and holding by claiming that
this contrast does not arise only once, that there is only one boundary
between being and holding, but that this relationship, constantly repeated,
leads from level to level: what holds for objects of the first level has a
second mode of being, and can in turn become the object of something
that holds of it (on a third level) etc. So far as construction theory is
concerned, this is the logically strict form of the dialectic of the conceptual process. Hence the concepts being and holding are relative and
express the relation between each constructional level and the succeeding one.
EXAMPLE. Stepwise progress of construction, in which the relationship between being and holding recurs several times: Classes are constructed from things. These classes do not consist of the things. They
do not have being in the same sense as the things; rather, they hold for
the things. These classes, even though they hold of things, can now be
envisaged as having a second mode of being. From them we can proceed, for example, to the cardinal numbers, which hold for these classes.
(For the construction of cardinal numbers as classes of classes, cf.
5 40.) Cardinal numbers belong to a third mode of being and allow us
to construct the fractions as relation extensions which hold for certain
cardinal numbers (cf. 5 40). These fractions can also be reified 3*, that
is, they can be envisaged as belonging to a fourth mode of being, and
can be made elements of certain classes which hold for them, namely
the real numbers. The latter belong to a fifth mode of being, while the
complex numbers, being relation extensions that hold for certain real
numbers, belong to a sixth mode of being, etc.

This example involves only six steps, but it gives an idea that construction will lead to completely different kinds of objects if many such
steps are taken. Eventually we shall arrive at objects which do not disclose, at first sight, nay for which it seems impossible, that they are
constructed from the basic objects. Hence the appearance of paradox
in Kronecker's saying that all of mathematics treats of nothing but natural numbers, and even more in the thesis of construction theory that

''vergegenstiindlicht

72

1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

the objects of all sciences are constructed from the same basic objects
through nothing but the application of the ascension forms of class and
relation extension.

43. A n Objection Against the Extensional Method of Construction
We have seen earlier that a constructional definition in the form of a
definition in use ( $ 39) consists in declaring that two propositional
functions have the same meaning. We have furthermore considered
(5 40) that the propositional function so introduced can be determined
only as far as its extension is concerned and that it is therefore sufficient to introduce, by way of a constructional definition, merely the
extension symbol of the propositional function rather than the propositional function itself. Through this procedure, concepts are defined
only extensionally. We therefore speak of an extensional method of construction. It is based upon the thesis o f extensionality: in every statement about a concept, this concept may be taken extensionally (i.e., it
may be represented by its extension [class or relation extension]). More
precisely: in every statement about a propositional function, the latter
may be replaced by its extension symbol.
One could now object that difficulties might result from the extensional method when one proceeds from an extensionally defined concept
to statements about it and then to other concepts. For traditional logic
does not subscribe to the thesis of extensionality: it claims that not all
statements about a concept can be brought into the form of an extension
statement.
REFERENCES. The above objection is related to the old distinction
between extensional and intensionaI logic. However, there is no exact
criterion as to when a statement concerns the extension or the intension
of a concept. This distinction became important when the first systems
of logic or symbolic logic (Boole, Venn, and Schroder) not only
developed logic as merely extensional, but confined the field even more
by taking subsumption to be the only statement form. Proceeding from
Frege's theories, Russell then went beyond this narrow limitation: his
system combines intensional with extensional logic. Frege was the first
who made precise the much-discussed and age-old distinction between
intension and extension of a concept by differentiating the concept as a
function, the values of which are truth values, from its course of values 39
(in our terminology, "propositional function" and "extension"). UtilizaB

Wertverlauf

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 73

ing this distinction, Russell developed intensional logic as the theory of
propositional functions and extensional logic as the theory of extensions
(classes and relation extensions). In this system, even extensional logic
contains not only subsumptive statements but a large number of statements which differ from one another by the kind of predicate they have,
while intensional logic is not bound to any definite statement form. According to Russell's earlier opinions, statements of intensional logic are
not all translatable into statements about extensions: [Princ. Math.] I,
76 ff., [Math. Phil.] 187 f. Wittgenstein has attacked this position [Abhandlg.] 243 f., and subsequently Russell has been inclined to abandon
it: Preface to Wittgenstein [Abhandlg.] 194 ff., [Princ. Math.] IZ pp. xiv
and 659ff.
From a position which is closely related to that of Wittgenstein,
we shall show that the indicated conception is in fact not tenable. We
shall show the validity of the thesis of extensionality, so that any objection against the extensional method loses all force.
The objection to the extensional method is aimed not only at the constructional system with which we are here concerned, but philosophers
who stand aloof from mathematics have made it a principal objection
to any formal method which uses predominantly extensions, especially
when it is concerned, as we are here, not with purely logical, but with
epistemological, problems. Now, Russell's formulation of the diierence
between "extensional" and "intensional" statements has so far been the
only attempt to give a clear account of the extension-intension problem.
Thus, in spite of Russell's own scruples, it is the strongest weapon which
we can hand our opponents so that a valid decision may be achieved.
A statement is called extensional if it can be transformed into an
extension statement (class or relation (extension) statement); otherwise, it is called intensional. It is a necessary and sufficient condition for
the extensionality of a statement about a propositional function f that
we can replace f by any coextensive propositional function without
changing the truth value of the statement. The thesis of extensionality
states that all statements about any propositional function are extensional (i.e., that there are no intensional statements).
REFERENCES. Russell [Princ. Math.] I, 72 ff. and [Math. Phil.]
187 f.; both give examples for (apparently) intensional statements.

EXAMPLE. Let us consider the coextensive propositional functions,
"x is a man" and "x is a rational animal". The following statement

about the first of these propositional functions is to be evaluated with
respect to its extensionality: " "x is a man" universally implies (i.e., for

74

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

all values of its argument) "x is mortal" ". We do not have to investigate whether this statement is true or false. It retains, in any case, its
truth value (i.e., it remains true or false) if, in place of "x is a man",
we put the coextensive propositional function " x is a rational animal"
or any other coextensive propositional function whatever. Thus the
criterion is fulfilled and the implication statement in question is shown
to be extensional. That it can in fact be transformed into an extension
statement, more precisely, into a class statement, can easily be shown:
"The class of all men is contained in the class of all mortals". (Here,
the second propositional function has been transformed at the same
time.)
As a counter-example, let us consider the following statement about
the same propositional function: "I believe that " x is a man" universally
implies "x is mortal" ". Here, we may not simply replace " x is a man"
by some other coextensive propositional function. For one cannot conclude, from the given statement, whether my thinking and believing
was at all concerned with other coextensive concepts, for example, with
the concept, "rational animal". The above statement, "I believe that
. . thus seems to be a nonextensional, i.e., intensional, statement
about the propositional function, "x is a man". We shall later on return
to this example and to the thesis of extensionality, but, at this point, I
wish to introduce some new concepts which are required for the solution of this problem.

."

44. The Distinction Between Sign Statements, Sense Statements,
and Nominatum Statements
In order to give a foundation for the thesis of extensionality and thus
to justify the extensional method of construction, we have to introduce
another, more general, classification of statements than the abovediscussed distinction between extensional and intensional statements
about propositional functions. This classification will be concerned
not only with statements about propositional functions, but with statements about any objects whatever, as well as about statements and
functions. We distinguish sign statements, sense statements, and nominatum statements.
This distinction is connected with the three different ways in which
a sign may be used. We distinguish from the sign itself, on the one
hand the sense which it "expresses" and on the other hand the nominatum
which it "designates". (This distinction stems from Frege [Sinn], [Grundges.] I, 7.) If a sign is placed in the argument position of a propositional
function, then it is not in itself clear what is meant as the argument for

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS O F THE CONSTRUmIONAL SYSTEM

1 75

the propositional function, even if the sign and its nominatum are known.
Though one can generally guess it from the context, we shall introduce
some auxiliary symbols (only for $ 9 44, 45) in order to make the distinction clearer and to indicate which of the three k i d s is meant. If the
sign itself is the argument of the propositional function, then we enclose
2" conit in quotation marks, e.g., " "7" is an Arabic number", " "5
sists of three constituents". We enclose the argument sign in brackets
if its nominatum, i.e., that which is designated by it, is meant, as is
usually the case. For example: "[7] is an odd number". But there is a
third thing that could be meant by the sign 7. We shall distinguish it
from the nominatum by calling it the sense of the sign and shall indicate
it by pointed brackets, e.g., "I just had the representation 40 (7)". What
is meant by this becomes still more clear when we compare the substitutions which are possible in the three cases, if the truth value is to be
preserved. In the case of the sign statement, very little variation is permissible. The above statement about "7" allows neither the substitution
of "VII" nor of "5 + 2". On the other hand, in the sentence which
contains the sign "(7)", we may replace it by "(VII)", for the sense
statement asserts that I have a representation of the number seven, and
this fact can be expressed equally well with any of the three signs
(seven), (7), (VII). On the other hand, the statement, "I just had
the representation (5 2)" does not necessarily have the same truth
value; it is not required that I should have had a representation of the
sum of five and two. The norninat~trnexpression shows itself least
susceptible to change. In the sentences, "[7] is an odd number" or "[7] >
6", I may substitute [VII] as well as [5 f 21. Consequently, we give the
following definitions: by the sign itself we mean the written (or linguistic,
etc.) figure; 7, VII, 5 2 are different from one another as far as the
signs themselves are concerned; hence, in our nomenclature: "7", "VII",
and "5 2" are different objects. By the sense of a sign we mean that
which the intensional objects, i.e., representations, thoughts, etc., which
the sign is to evoke, have in common. 7 and VII have the same sense,
namely, the number seven as the content of a representation or thought;
5 + 2 has a different sense. Hence, (7) is the same as (VII), but
(5 + 2) is something different. Likewise, (the evening star) is the
same as (der Abendstern), but (the morning star) is something different;
(Scott) is something different from (the author of Waverley). By the
mminatum of a sign we mean the object which it designates; 7, VII, and
5 4- 2 have the same nominatum, namely, the number seven (arithmeti-

+

+

+

+

-

a Vorstcllung

CHAPTER

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

THE SYSTEM FORM

1 79

logistic rendition, either in their entirety, or as far as their logical
skeleton is concerned, or at least that they are given in logical form. We
say that a statement or a propositional function has been given a
logistic rendition, if it is expressed in logistic symbols. By the logical
skeleton of a statement or a propositional function, we mean its logical
structure.41 Thus, we shall say of a statement that its logical skeleton has
been given a logistic rendition, if all extralogical concepts are expressed
by the customary words, while the logical relations between these extralogical concepts, which constitute the skeleton, are expressed by logistic
signs. We shall say that a statement is given in logical form if it is
expressed entirely in words of the natural language, but in such words
that there is a unique way, on the basis of either explicit or tacit agreements, of giving the skeleton in logistic rendition.
EXAMPLE. Statement in natural language: "If somebody is a
Negro, then he is also a man." Logical form: "If somebody belongs
to the class of Negroes, then he also always belongs to the class of men".
Logistic rendition of the logical skeleton: " ( x ) : x s Negro. > . x man";
logistic expression of the entire statement: " ( x ) : x e ne. > . x e ma".

1. FORMAL INVESTIGATIONS

REFERENCE. About the logical skeleton: Carnap [Logistik] 8 42 ff.,
with examples for the logistic rendition of statements.

46. The System Form Depends Upon Reducibility

47. The Criterion for Reducibility in Realistic Language

After having discussed the problem of the ascension forms and having
found that the individual levels of the constructional system are to be
erected by means of definitions using classes and relation extensions, we
are now confronted with a second problem, namely, that of the "system
form" (i.e., the over-all form of the constructional system). How are we
to proceed with the step-by-step construction of our system, so that all
the objects of science find a place in it? In the preliminary Chapter I1 B,
we have already considered several object types. Now, the objects of the
various types are to be brought into a system. The order in the constructional system is determined by the fact that an object a can be
constructed on the basis of the objects b, c, . . which precede it. In
other words, a must be reducible to b, c, .
(i.e., propositional functions about a must be transformable into coextensive propositional
functions about b, c, . .)
For a precise application of this criterion, it would be required that
the propositional functions with which we are concerned are given a

The purpose of construction theory is to order the objects of all sciences
into a system according to their reducibility to one another. Thus, later
on, we shall have to inquire into the reducibility of the various object
types. There will then arise the difficulty that we have to apply the
criterion of reducibility to statements and statement forms which are
given only in word language. In view of this task, it is advisable to express
the criterion in still another form so that we no longer speak of propositional functions and their logical relations, but of states of affairs and
their factual 42 relations. Thus, we translate it from the formal-logical, in
this case the constructional language, into the language of facts, or
realistic language. (About the difference between these two languages,
see ยง 52.)
We now arrive at a factual criterion 43 of reducibility which is wanting

.
..

.

" formal-logische Form
"

sachlich

" Sachverhaltskriterium

80

I

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

in logical strictness, but allows easier application to the empirical findings
of the individual sciences. It is the following: We call an object a
"reducible to the objects b, c, . . ." if, for any state of affairs whatever,
relative to the objects a, b, c, . . . , a necessary and suficient condition
can be indicated which depends only upon objects b, c, . .
We must now show that this criterion coincides with the one we gave
earlier ( $ 35). The coextensiveness of two propositional functions A, B,
means: A universally implies B and vice versa ( ยง 32). Now, if A universally implies B, then this means that, in each case in which A is
satisfied, B is also satisfied; in other words, that A is a sufficient condition for B; and if B universally implies A, then this means that B is never
satisfied in any case in which A is not satisfied, so that A is a necessary
condition for B. Thus, if A and B are coextensive, then A is a necessary and sufficient condition for B (and, at the same time, B is a necessary
and sufficient condition for A, a point with which we are not here concerned). However, there seems to be a deviation in one point: the new
criterion speaks of "states of
while the earlier one speaks of
propositional functions. The question is whether a state of affairs is
indicated through a propositional function or through a statement. Here
we must make the following distinction: individual states of affairs are
to be indicated through statements; general states of affairs, through
propositional functions. Linguistic usage does not make a precise distinction between these two types. In the case of the reducibility criterion, we
are concerned with general states of affairs, since only they allow us to
speak of conditions. (The same holds for states of affairs which occur in
natural laws.) Thus, the two criteria agree in this point also.

.

48. The Basic State of Aflairs Relative to an Object
The factual criterion of reducibility offers still another difficulty which
arises from the expression "any state of affairs whatever". Thus, strictly
speaking, we would have to test the frequently very large number of
possible states of affairs in which the objects might occur, in order to
decide upon the reducibility of one object to another. However, it turns
out that for each object there is a basic state o f aflairs. It occurs in any
other state of affairs only in connection with this basic one. To put it
more precisely and in constructional language: for every object, there
is a fundamental propositional function such that all occurrences of the
object can be expressed with the aid of tbis fundamental propositional
Sachverhalt

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

81

function. For a property concept, the basic state of affairs is the occurrence of this property (fundamental propositional function: "x has the
property . . ." or "x is a . . ."); for a relational concept, the basic
state of affairs is the fact that the relation holds (fundamental propositional function: "x stands to y in the relation . . .").
In conformity with the extensional method of construction ( $ 43),
let a class symbol stand for a property concept, for example, say, c, and a
relation (extension) symbol for a relational concept, say, Q; then the
fundamental propositional functions are "x c c" and "x Q y". It is in fact
the case that every sentence in which the class symbol c occurs can be
transformed in such a way that c occurs only in the context "x c c", and
every sentence in which the relation symbol Q occurs can be transformed
so that Q occurs only in the context "x Q y".
Any definition, through which an object in the constructional system is
constructed (i.e., its "constructional definition"), has to make use of the
basic state of affairs for this object. The propositional function of the
basic state of affairs is the definiendum; the propositional function which
designates the necessary and sufficient condition for this basic state of
&airs is the definiens, for two propositional functions are coextensive if
one of them designates a necessary and sufficient condition for the other
(8 47). The juxtaposition of two coextensive propositional functions,
the first of which contains, besides the variables, only one symbol which
does not occur in the other one, can be viewed as a definition of this
symbol (i.e., as a contextual definition 8 39).
EXAMPLE. Construction of an object with the aid of its basic state
of affairs. The basic state of affairs of temperature equilibrium is: " x
stands to y in the relation of temperature equilibrium." A necessary
and sufficient condition for this is the state of affairs: "If bodies x and
y are brought into spatial contact (either directly or through the mediation of other bodies), then they show neither increase nor decrease in
temperature." Thus, these two propositional functions are coextensive.
Hence, we could use them for the formulation of a dehition for the
object of the first propositional function, namely, temperature equilibrium: "We call "temperature equilibrium" that relation between x and
y which is characterized by the fact that bodies x and y, if they are
brought into (direct or indirect) spatial contact with one another,
neither increase nor decrease in temperature." In the formulation of
the constructional system, the object "temperature equilibrium" can be
introduced (i.e., "constructed") in this way, provided that the other
objects which are referred to in the definition have been constructed
previously.

82

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

49. Indicators

45

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

According to the preceding considerations, the proof of the reducibility
of an object is to be based on the determination of a necessary and
sufficient condition for the basic state of affairs for that object. The
question arises whether such a condition can be established for every
basic state of affairs. T o solve this problem, we introduce the concept of a
scientific indicator. The indicator of a state of affairs is a sufficient condition for the state of affairs, but not every sufficient condition can be
called an indicator. We shall use the term "indicator" only for such
conditions as are ordinarily used to identify the state of affairs (i.e., which
are usually recognized before the state of affairs).
EXAMPLE. High air pressure and a high barometer reading are
conditions for one another: if the air pressure is high, then the barometer reading is high; if the barometer reading is high, then the air
pressure is high. But only in the second case do we call the condition
an indicator.

45

Kennzeichen

83

through conceptual criteria would forfeit every claim to scientific status.
Even the cultural sciences observe this limit to the admissibility of
empathy decisions, if not explicitly, then at least in their practical
procedures.
Thus we say that in principle there are indicators for all scientific
states of affairs. That is to say, we have the task of determining an
indicator for every scientific state of affairs, and in principle this task can
be fulfilled. A more detailed analysis, which we must omit for lack of
space, would show furthermore that, in principle, there is an infallible
and at the same time always present indicator for any scientific state of
affairs (i.e., an indicator which is present when and only when the state
of affairs is also present). Such an indicator can always be produced by
conjoining the various indicators for the individual cases; it is a necessary
and sufficient condition for the state of affairs. Thus, the construction o f
MY scienfifi object can be carried out by producing such an indicator
for its basic state o f affairs.

and Conditiom

Science usually gives indicators for many states of affairs of which it
treats, especially for the elementary ones, of which the others are composed, that is, especially for those that are suitable as basic states of
affairs as, for example, "This thing is an oak tree", "This thiig is a
cooperative purchasing corporation." True, the process of recognizing
such a state of affairs (i.e., the presence of a certain concept) is frequently not based on these indicators, but is carried out intuitively, even
in science. But even this intuitively recognized concept can be considered a fully determined scientific object only because such indicators
can be given. In many cases, especially in the cultural sciences, when we
are concerned, for example, with the stylistic character of a work of art,
etc., the indicators are given either very vaguely or not at all. In such a
case the decision as to whether a certain state of affairs obtains is not
made on the basis of rational criteria but by empathy. Such empathy
decisions are justly considered scientific decisions. The justification for
this rests upon the fact that either it is already possible, even though
very complicated in the individual case, to produce indicators whose
application does not require empathy or else that the task of finding such
indicators has been recognized as a scientific task and is considered as
solvable in principle. A decision, which has been made through empathy
or otherwise, which cannot in principle be subjected to a rational test

[

EXAMPLE. The indicator from which the rattlesnake has derived
its name is an infallible and always present indicator for the fact that
an animal is a rattlesnake. Thus the following propositional functions
are coextensive: "x is a rattlesnake" and "x is an animal which carries
a number of rattles at the end of its body". With these propositional

functions, the first of which expresses the basic state of affairs of the
object rattlesnake, we can produce a constructional definition for the
rattlesnake which, in the customary formulation, would read: "By
"rattlesnake", we mean an animal which carries rattles at the end of
its body."

50. Logical and Epistemic Value
If we transform a sentence about an object by replacing the object name
by its constructional definition, then the intuitive meaning 4B of the
..

sentence, and thus its epistemic value, is frequently changed. This could
lead to weighty objections against the method of construction which I am
here suggesting; therefore, 1 want to concern myself with the question,
in what respects the transformed sentence agrees with the original one
and in what respects it does not.
If a is reducible to b, c, then the propositional functions K, L, . .
abut a are coextensive with the propositional functions K', L', which are
exclusively about b, c. The constructional transformation (i.e., the

.

-

der vorsteUungsmiissigcSinn

84

1

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

elimination of the object a with the aid of its constructional definition)
consists in the transformation of the propositional functions K, L, . . .
into K', L', . . Since the former are coextensive with the latter, the
constructional transformation of a propositional function leaves the
extension unchanged ( 8 32); in the case of a statement, the truth value
remains unchanged (i.e., it remains either true or false). Let us summarize these two cases in the following way: a constructional transformation leaves the logical value of a propositional function, as well as of a
statement, untouched. We contrast this logical value with the "epistemic
value". A constructional transformation may, for example, turn a true,
epistemically valuable statement into a triviality; in such a case, we say
that the "epistemic value" has been changed. But, since the trivial statement is also true, the logical value has not changed. A constructional
transformation of a statement (or propositional function) always leaves
the logical value, but not necessarily the epistemic value, unchanged.
(In contradistinction to translations from one natural language to
another, these transformations do not have to preserve the intuitive
content.) This is an essential characteristic of the constructional method:
as regards object names, statements, and propositional functions, it is
concerned exclusively with logical, not with epistemic, value; it is purely
logical, not psychological.

.

EXAMPLE. In $49, we have given a constructional definition for
the rattlesnake. Let us use this definition in order to carry out the constructional transformation of the following sentence: "This animal,
which carries rattles at the end of its body, is a rattlesnake." The result
is the following tautology: "This animal, which carries rattles . . . ,
is an animal which carries rattles . . .". The epistemic value of the
original sentence has been lost in the transformation. On the other
hand, the logical value has becn retained: the truth value of the tautology is truth, just as was the case with the original sentence.
REFERENCES. Our theory of indicators and definite descriptions
is, on the whole, based on Russell's theory of descriptions; ([Princ.
Math.] I, 181 ff., [Math. Phil.] 168 ff., [Description]). There is, however,
a deviation which follows from our distinction between logical and
epistemic value: we consider a definite dcscription as equivalent with
(of the same logical value as) the proper name of the object which is
described; Russell's argument from triviality ([Princ. Math.] I, 70,
[Math. Phil.] 175 f.) is no objection, since a triviality may have the
same logical value as a statement with a positive epistemic value. This
conception is related to the thesis of extensionality ( 8 43 ff.).

1 85

51. Logical Translation and Translation o f Sense
Constructional theory constructs an object by seeking an infallible and
always present indicator for it (more precisely, for its basic state of
&airs). This is claimed to be a definition of the object, but it does not
seem to achieve what we generally require of a definition in the sense of a
. ~ ~such, it would have to indicate the essential
conceptual d e f i n i t i ~ n As
characteristics of a concept, but these are frequently not contained in the
indicator.
We can view a definition as a rule of substitution or replacement; it
states that a certain sign (the definiendum) may be replaced in all statements by another (generally complex) sign (the definiens). We can
require different kinds of invariance from such a translation. If we require
that the translated statements have the same logical value as the original
ones, but not necessarily the same epistemic value, then we speak of a
logical translation. On the other hand, if we make the more comprehensive requirement that the translation leave invariant also the epistemic
value, that is the sense of the statements (as, for example, in the translation of a text from one natural language to another), then we speak
of a translation of sense; (in this case the logical value, too, remains
necessarily unchanged). Since the construction of an object in the constructional system has always to do only with logical value and not with
epistemic value ( $ 5 0 ) , a constructional definition which employs the
indicator of an object and which thus produces a logical translation
achieves exactly what we demand of it.
REFERENCES. The concern with nothing but the logical value (truth
value) for a constructional derivation agrees with Leibniz' definition of
identity: "Eadum sunt, quorum unum potest substitui alteri salva
veritate."

52. Realistic and Constructional Language
One could raise still another objection against the use of an indicator in a
constructional definition. There seems to be a fundamental opposition
between construction theory and the empirical sciences as concerns the
conception of reality. For example, we construct heteropsychological
objects (i.e., the psychological occurrences in another person) on the
2___

''Begriffserkliirung
"das Fremdpsychischc

86

I

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

basis of physical indicators, namely, expressive motions and bodily
reactions, including linguistic utterances, of the other person. To this,
one could object from a realistic viewpoint, that heteropsychological
occurrences are in reality something different from the reaction behavior,
which plays only the role of an indicator.
EXAMPLE. Let us consider anger (here taken as something heteropsychological, i.e., as the anger of another person, in contrast to one's
own anger, which we assume to be already constructed). The constructional definition of somebody else's anger would be something like this:
"anger of person A" means "state of the body of A characterized
through such and such physical processes of this body or through a
certain disposition to react to stimuli of such and such a kind through
physical processes of such and such a kind" (where the type of process
is characterized with the aid of processes of my own body when I am
angry). Here, the realistic objection would run somewhat like this: "The
physical behavior of the other person's body is not itself the anger, but
only an indicator of the anger."

Let K stand for the physical reaction behavior which is the indicator
of a certain heteropsychological process. The objection amounts, then, to
the following: the concept of this heteropsychological process is not itself
identical with K, and therefore requires its own symbol, for example, F.
To this objection, we make the following reply: all scientific (though not
all metaphysical) statements about F, especially all statements which are
made within psychology itself, can be transformed into statements about
K that have the same logical value. Now, since K and F satisfy the same
propositional functions, they are to be considered as identical (as far as
logical value is concerned). No meaning for F, which is not identical
with K, can be given in scientific (i.e., constructable) expressions. (This
question is connected with Leibniz' thesis of the identity of indiscernibles,
cf. ยง 51; and also with the problem of introjection and with the metaphysical component of the problem of reality, 3 175 f.).
The realistic language, which the empirical sciences generally use, and
the constructional language have actually the same meaning: they are
both neutral as far as the decision of the metaphysical problem of reality
between realism and idealism is concerned. It must be admitted that, in
practice, linguistic realism, which is very useful in the empirical sciences,
is frequently extended to a metaphysical realism; but this is a transgression of the boundary of science (cf. $178). There can be no objection against such a transgression, as long as it influences only the mental
representations which accompany the scientific statements; this tram-

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 87

gression is objectionable only if it influences the content of the statements of science.
Let us emphasize again the neutrality especially of the constructional
language. This language is not intended to express any of the so-called
epistemological, but in reality metaphysical, doctrines (for example,
realism, idealism, solipsism), but only epistemic-logical relations. In the
same sense, the expression "quasi object" designates only a certain logical
relationship and is not meant as the denial of a metaphysical reality. It
must be noted that all real objects (and construction theory considers
them as real to the same degree as do the empirical sciences, cf. 5 170)
are quasi objects.
Once it is acknowledged that the realistic and the constructional
languages have the same meaning, it follows that constructional definitions and the statements of the constructional system can be formed by
translating indicator-statements and other statements which are found
in the realistic language of the empirical sciences.
Once realistic and constructional languages are recognized as nothing
but two different languages which express the same state of affairs,
several, perhaps even most, epistemological disputes become pointless.

53. Summary. Method for Solving the Problem of the System Form
The problem of the system form is expressed in the question: how can
the different object types be brought into a system such that the higher
ones can always be constructed from the lower ones (i.e., such that the
former are reducible to the latter)? To solve this problem, we must
inquire into the mutual reducibility of the various object types. TO
accomplish this end, we take into account the information available in
the special sciences, and, with its aid, attempt to find for each object under
investigation the various possibilities for necessary and sufficient conditions for the basic state of affairs of that object. We can proceed by
asking the special science in question for an (infallible and always
present) indicator of the basic state of affairs. But through this method
we cannot find all necessary and sufficient conditions. For this method
looks only in one direction; it proceeds from a given object to those
other objects which are already known. In the system form which we
shall later on choose for the constructional system, construction will
generally proceed in this direction, since this system is intended to reflect
the epistemological hierarchy of objects. Thus, we can frequently use
the method of indicators. However, in order to see the possibilities of

1

88

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

other system forms, we shall have to pay some attention to conditions
other than indicators.
After having here developed a method for testing reducibility, this test
is to be applied in the following, second, half of this chapter, to the most
important object types. This will allow us to discern the various possible
system forms.
REFERENCES. The investigation of the reducibility of one object to
other objects corresponds to what has been called, in realistic language,
"determination" of real objects from other real objects or from the
given.49 The methods and particular criteria which are to be used in
such determinations have been discussed in great detail by Kulpe
([Realis.] esp. Vol. 111).
Construction theory can accept and utilize all the results of investigations about "realization",50 for example, those of Kulpe; but we must
be careful not to substitute the metaphysical concept of reality for the
purely constructional concept (cf. ยง 175 f.). In construction theory, we
must exercise a methodological abstinence as far as the postulating of
reality 51 is concerned (cf. ยง 64); thus it is advisable to use a neutral
language: in construction theory, we translate the findings of the empirical sciences from the "realistic" language into the "constructional"
language (cf. 152).

2. MATERIAL INVESTIGATIONS

54. Epistemic Primacy
Using the method which has been developed in the first half of this
chapter, we now have to investigate the relations of reducibility which
obtain between the objects of knowledge. Frequently, these relations
hold in different directions, so that they alone do not uniquely determine
the order of the system.
The system form which we want to give to our outline of the constructional system is characterized by the fact that it not only attempts
to exhibit, as any system form, the order of the objects relative to their
reducibility, but that it also attempts to show their order relative to
epistemic primacy. An object (or an object type) is called epistemically
primary relative to another one, which we call epistemically secondary,
"Bestimmung" der Realitaten aus anderen Realitaten oder aus dem Gegebenen
Realisiemng
51 Realsetzung

49

50

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

89

if the second one is recognized through the mediation of the first and
thus presupposes, for its recognition, the recognition of the first. Fortunately, the sequence of constructions which is required for the expression
of epistemic primacy is maintained when the method of indicators is
applied, since an indicator is epistemically primary relative to its object.
However, we also wish to investigate here other directions which r e
ducibility relations may take, so as to ascertain the various possible
system forms.
The fact that we take into consideration the epistemic relations does
not mean that the syntheses or formations of cognition, as they occur in
the actual process of cognition, are to be represented in the constructional system with all their concrete characteristics. In the constructional
system, we shall merely reconstruct these manifestations in a rationalizing or schematizing fashion; intuitive understanding is replaced by
discursive reasoning.

55. Cultural Objects are Reducible to Psychological Objects
We have seen earlier that the manifestation relation holds between
psychological and cultural objects, and the documentation relation between physical and cultural objects ( $ 24). It is these two relations
which mediate the recognition of cultural objects. Admittedly, not every
cultural object must necessarily be immediately manifested or documented. There may be some which are based upon other cultural objects
and whose recognition is mediated through the latter. But, even then,
they are indirectly recognized through manifestation and documentation.
EXAMPLE. We ascertain the religion of a given society through the
representations, emotions, thoughts, volitions of a religious sort which
occur with the members of this society; also, documents in the form of
writings, pictures, and buildings are considered. Thus, the recognition
depends upon the manifestation and the documentation of the object in
question.

It is occasionally claimed that it is possible to recognize cultural objects without having to take a detour via psychological processes in
which they manifest themselves or via physical documentation. But so
far, such methods are not known to science and have not yet been
applied. The cultural sciences recognize their objects, whether a custom,
a language, a state, an economy, art, or whatever, not through disCurSive reasoning, but through "empathy" or verstehen. But this in-

90

I

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

tuitive procedure, without exception, begins with manifestations and
documentations. Furthermore, it is not merely the case that intuitive
understanding, or empathy, is occasioned by the recognition of the
mediating psychological or physical objects, but its content is completely
determined through the character of the mediating objects.
EXAMPLE. The awareness of the aesthetic content of a work of art,
for example a marble statue, is indeed not identical with the recognition
of the sensible characteristics of the piece of marble, its shape, size,
color, and material. But this awareness is not something outside of the
perception, since for it no content other than the content of perception
is given; more precisely: this awareness is uniquely determined through
what is perceived by the senses. Thus, there exists a unique functional
relation between the physical properties of the piece of marble and the
aesthetic content of the work of art which is represented in this piece of
marble.

Our considerations show that all cultural objects are reducible to their
manifestations and documentations, either directly or through the mediation of other cultural objects. However, the documentation of a cultural
object necessarily takes place with the aid of a manifestation. For, if a
physical object is to be formed or transformed in such a way that it becomes a document, a bearer of expression for the cultural object, then
this requires an act of creation or transformation on the part of one or
several individuals, and thus psychological occurrences in which the
cultural object comes alive; these psychological occurrences are the
manifestations of the cultural object.
From this it follows that the domain of objects to which the cultural
objects are reducible can be narrowed down: every cultural object is
reducible to its manifestations, that is, to psychological objects.

56. The Comtruction of Cultural Objects from Psychological
0bjects
The recognition that all cultural objects are reducible to psychological
objects does not in itself determine whether or not we shall construct
the former from the latter within the constructional system. It is imaginable that there are certain persuasions (for example, the theory which
interprets the entire world process dialectically as the emanation of a
spirit) which lead to the assumption that all psychological objects are
reducible to cultural ones. Such a supposition would indicate the

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 91

possibility of a construction in the opposite direction. We shall not
investigate the correctness of this assumption at this time.
In the system form which we shall use for our outline of a constructional system, we shall construct the cultural objects from the psychological ones and not vice versa. The reason for this lies in the epistemic
relation between the two object types as it is expressed in the method of
science. We have seen earlier that manifestations of cultural objects (and,
furthermore, also documentations, which, however, lead to manifestations) have the role of indicators; more precisely, the role of objects
which mediate recognition, from whose characteristics alone science
ascertains the characteristics of the cultural objects themselves. This
establishes the epistemic primacy of the psychological objects over the
cultural objects. Since we have previously laid down a principle, according to which we shall choose a system form for which the direction of
construction is determined by epistemic primacy, it is now determined
that, in our constructional system, the cultural objects are constructed
from the others, and especially from the psychological objects, and not
vice versa.
Natural science tends to the opinion that a state, a custom, a religion
consists of the psychological processes in which the entity in question
manifests itself, just as a piece of iron consists of its molecules. I n opposition to this, the cultural sciences tend to consider such entities as
entities of a special type, not just as a sum of psychological processes.
Construction theory claims indeed that cultural objects are reducible
to psychological ones and constructs the former from the latter in one of
its system forms. Nevertheless, it considers the position of the cultural
sciences justified. Cultural objects are not compounded out of psychological objects. We have already emphasized their peculiar character
and have shown, not only that they are widely different from psychological objects, but that they belong to another "object sphere" ( $ $ 23,
31).
Thus, construction theory agrees with the cultural sciences as far as
the independence of the cultural object type is concerned. On the other
hand, it fulfills a requirement which is emphasized especially in the
natural sciences, namely, the requirement of an analysis of cultural
objects (is., their reduction to other objects). However, by analysis
we do not mean decomposition into constituents. "Reducibility" and
"construction" have the previously defined meaning of translatibility of
statements ( $ $ 2, 35). In principle, all statements about cultural objects
can be transformed into statements about psychological objects. But this

82

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

is to be taken in a very modest sense. We cannot reproduce the sense
of a statement about cultural objects in statements about psychological
objects. (It can be done sometimes, but not always.) When we claim
that a transformation in the constructional sense is possible, we mean
that a transformation rule is possible, the application of which will leave
the logical value, though not always the episternic value, unchanged.
This has been discussed earlier ( $ 50 f.).
REFERENCES. The question whether or not cultural objects can be
resolved into psychological processes is a matter of dispute (cf., for
example, Freyer [Obj. Geist] 53). According to our considerations, this
question must be answered in the negative, if by resolution is meant the
proof of composition out of constituent parts, but it is to be answered in
the affirmative if by resolution is meant the proof of logical reducibility.

57. Physical Objects are Reducible t o Psychological Objects and
Vice Versa
Statements about physical objects can be transformed into statements
about perceptions (i.e., about psychological objects). For example, the
statement that a certain body is red is transformed into a very complicated statement which says roughly that, under certain circumstances, a
certain sensation of the visual sense ("red") occurs.
Statements about physical objects which are not immediately about
sensory qualities can be reduced to statements that are. If a physical
object were irreducible to sensory qualities and thus to psychological
objects, this would mean that there are no perceptible indicators for it.
Statements about it would be suspended in the void; in science, at least,
there would be no room for it. Thus, all physical objects are reducible to
psychological ones.
For every psychological process, there is a corresponding "parallel
process" in the brain, i.e., a physical process. There is a univocal
correspondence between each property of the psychological process and
some (even though entirely different) property of the brain process.
Thus, every statement about a psychological object is translatable into a
statement about physical objects. Since the correlation problem of the
psychophysical relation (cf. $ 21) has not yet been solved, the present
state of science does not allow us to indicate a general rule of translation.
However, for our present purposes, the logical existence of this rule (i.e.,
the fact that a correlation of this kind holds) allows us to draw the
conclusion that it is in principle possible to reduce all psychological
objects to physical objects.

1

93

REFERENCES. The indicated position of a thoroughgoing and univocal psychophysical correlation is maintained, for example, by Wundt
[Phys. Psychol.] 111, 752; opponents of this position are, for example,
Becher [Gehirn] and Bergson [Materiel. A comprehensive bibliography
about this problem is given in Busse [Geist]. Cf. also ยง ยง 58, 59.

An entirely different kind of reduction of psychological to physical
objects is based, not upon the almost altogether unknown psychophysical
relation, but upon the expression relation. To the expression relation in
the narrower sense ( $ 19), we must here add another relation which one
could call, for example, reporting relation. By this we mean the relation
between a bodily motion and a psychological process, provided that this
motion indicates through speech, writing, or other sign-giving the
presence and the nature of the psychological process. An example is the
relation between the speech motions of a man which form the sentence:
"I am glad about the beautiful weather" and his gladness about the
beautiful weather. Expressive motions,62 including reports of this type,
are the only indicators by which we can recognize the psychological
processes in other persons, the heteropsychological processes. Now,
every heteropsychological process is in principle recognizable, that is, it
can either be inferred from expressive motions or else questions can be
asked about it. (It can be reported.) Thus, every statement about a
psychological object can be transformed into a statement about those
indicators. Thus it follows that all psychological objects can be reduced
to expressive motions (in the wider sense), i.e., to physical objects.
From the recognizability in principle of every kind of heteropsychological process and from the uninterrupted causal nexus among physical
processes, it follows that all types of psychological processes have
physical parallels (in the central nervous system). (This runs counter to
the position of Bergson and others; see below.) We shall not here concern ourselves with a proof for our contention; it is not as important for
the system form which we are here using as it would be for a form with
physical basis ( 8 59).

"

5 8 . The Autopsychological and the Heteropsychological
We now have to decide whether our system form requires a construction
of the psychological objects from the physical objects or vice versa.
Because of their mutual reducibility, it is logically possible to do either.
s2

Ausdrucksbewegungen
geschlosscne Gesetzmiissigkeit

04 I THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

Hence, we have to investigate the epistemic relation between these two
object types. It turns out that psychological processes of other subjects
can be recognized only through the mediation of physical objects, namely,
through the mediation of expressive motions (in the wider sense) or, if
we assume a state of brain physiology which has not yet been reached,
through the mediation of brain processes. On the other hand, the recognition of our own psychological processes does not need to be mediated
through the recognition of physical objects, but takes place directly.
Thus, in order to arrange psychological and physical objects in the
constructional system according to their epistemic relation, we have to
split the domain of psychological objects into two parts: we separate the
heteropsychological objects from the autopsychological objects. The
autopsychological objects are epistemically primary relative to the
physical objects, while the heteropsychological objects are secondary.
Thus, we shall construct the physical objects from the autopsychological
and the heteropsychological from the physical objects.
Thus, the sequence with respect to epistemic primacy of the four most
important object domains is: the autopsychological, the physical, the
heteropsychological, the cultural. Thus, our system form requires an
arrangement within the constructional system which corresponds to this
sequence. For the moment, this gives us a rough indication of the overall form. We shall later discuss the arrangement of the individual object
types within these major domains.
REFERENCES. Especially Dingler [Naturphil.] has clearly shown the
necessity for treating separately the autopsychological and the heteropsychological, especially when we are concerned with epistemological
investigations ("autopsychology"-"allopsychology") .
Becher [Geisteswiss.] 285 ff. has shown against Scheler that the heteropsychological can be recognized only through a mediation of the physical. For a detailed proof that the heteropsychological is reducible to the
physical and indeed that it is epistemically secondary, see Carnap
[Realismus].

59. A System Form with Physical Basis
If it is not required that the order of construction reflect the epistemic
order of objects, other system forms are also possible. The possibility of
placing the basis of the system in the domain of the cultural objects is
quite problematic. While it is in fact possible to envisage all psychological processes as manifestations of cultural entities, the difficulty, if

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTION& SYSTEM

1

95

not impossibility, of such a system form lies in the fact that one cannot
suppose all properties of psychological processes to be determined
through the nature of the cultural entities which are manifested in them.
Thus there is no thoroughgoing reducibility of psychological objects to
cultural ones.
Since all cultural objects are reducible to psychological, and all
psychological to physical objects, the basis of the system can be placed
within the domain of physical objects. Such a system form could be
called materialistic, since a system of this form would seem the most
appropriate from the standpoint of materialism. However, it is important
to separate clearly the logico-constructional aspect of the theory from its
metaphysical aspect. From the logical viewpoint of construction theory,
no objection can be made against scientific materialism. Its claim, namely,
that all psychological (and other) objects are reducible to physical
objects is justified. Construction theory and, more generally, (rational)
science neither maintain nor deny the additional claim of metaphysical
materialism that all psychological processes are essentially physical, and
that nothing but the physical exists. The expressions "essence" and
"exists" (as they are used here) have no place in the constructional
system, and this alone shows them to be metaphysical; cf. ยง$ 176, 161.
A materialistic constructional system has the advantage that it uses as
its basic domain the only domain (namely, the physical) which is characterized by a clear regularity of its processes. In this system form,
psychological and cultural events become dependent upon the physical
objects because of the way they are constructed. Thus they are placed
within the one law-governed total process." Since the task of empirical
science (natural science, psychology, cultural science) consists, on the
one hand, in the discovery of general laws, and, on the other hand, in the
explanation of individual events through their subsumption under
general laws, it follows that from the standpoint of empirical science the
constructional system with physical basis constitutes a more appropriate
arrangement of concepts than any other. (For the basis problem of this
system, cf 8 62.) We cannot, at this time, give an explicit characterization of this system and its importance for science.
From an epistemological viewpoint (in contradistinction to the viewpoint of empirical science), we are led to another arrangement of
concepts, namely, to a constructional system with autopsychological
basis ($ 60).
min das eine gesetvnbsige Gesamtgeschehen

86

I

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

REFERENCES. The so-called behavioral psychology (the "behaviorism" of Watson, Dewey, and others; see the bibliography in Russell
[Mind]) reduces all psychological phenomena to what can be perceived
through the senses, i.e., to the physical. Thus a constructional system
which is based upon this position would choose a physical basis. According to what we have said above, such a system would be quite possible
and practicable. However, the further claim of behaviorism, namely,
that this ordering of objects is also a correct reflection of the epistemic
relations, would still remain problematic.
It could seem to be an open question whether in a constructional
system with physical basis there is room for the domain of values. This
doubt, however, has been removed by Ostwald [Werte] with his derivation of values of several types upon a basis of energetics (based upon
the second principle of energetics with the aid of the concept of dissipation). From a philosophical standpoint, it must be admitted that there is
a methodological justification and fruitfulness, not only for the experiential, "phenomenological", but also for the energistic derivation of values.
(We shall employ the phenomenological method in the outline of our
constructional system, cf. 8 152.) The decision between the two is not a
question of validity, but one of system form; the difference lies merely in
the way in which the problems are posed and the concepts constructed.
Science as a whole needs both theories to exhibit both directions of
logical reducibility, just as it needs a behavioristic as well as an introspective psychology; in general, it needs both an experiential and a
materialistic derivation of all concepts.

60. System Forms with Psychological Basis
I t is possible t o have a constructional system with a psychological basis.
The logical justification for this system form is independent of any
metaphysical standpoint and rests solely upon the above proof that all
cultural as well as physical objects are reducible to psychological objects.
Theories of a positivist, especially sensationalist, persuasion are generally grounded upon a system form with psychological basis. The fact
that we, too, use such a system form, however, does not mean that we
proceed from a sensationalist o r positivist position. Any decision o n
problems of this type lies outside of construction theory, namely, as we
shall show later, in the domain of metaphysics ( S 178).
I n the main, we have to distinguish two system forms with psychological basis: with one of them, the basis lies in the domain of the
psychological in general; with the other, only in the autopsychological
domain. I t follows from previous considerations that the first system form

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCrIONAL SYSTEM

1

87

(regardless of its logical possibility) does not always allow a construction in the order of the epistemic relation. Thus, because of our intention to express the epistemic order of the objects, we must use only the
system form with the autopsychological basis for our outline of the constructional system.
REFERENCES. Gatschenberger ([Symbola] 437 ff., esp. 451) shows
the possibility of two "sublanguages", which correspond to (in our
terminology) the system forms with psychological and physical basis
respectively: the scientific "language of the postulated" 65 and the psychological "language of the given". Gatschenberger is of the opinion that
a pure language of the given cannot be accomplished; however, by using
such a language in our constructional system, we shall show that a
system form with psychological basis can be achieved.
55

ddes Geforderten

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

CHAPTER

1

09

elements which are their members; generally speaking, construction
theory considers individual objects as secondary, relative to the network
of relations in which they stand.
Thus, we divide the basis problem into the quest for basic elements
and the quest for basic relations.

THE BASIS

62. Possible Physical Bases
As was shown above, there seem to be two possibilities for the over-all
form of the constructional system, namely, a system form with a physical
basis o r one with a psychological basis ( a system form with a cultural
basis appeared unworkable). In order to gain a general view of the
various possibilities for constructional systems, we shall deal with the
basis problem as it occurs in these different system forms and not only as
we find it in the form which we shall ultimately adopt. Concerning the
choice of a physical basis, we shall briefly indicate, by way of example,
three possibilities without thereby excluding others.

1. THE BASIC ELEMENTS

61. The Two Parts o f the Basis Problem: Basic Elements and
Basic Relations
The problem of the basis of the constructional system falls into two
parts. At first we must decide which objects to take as basic elements
(i.e., as objects of the lowest constructional level). However, if further
construction is to be possible, still other objects must be placed at the
beginning of the constructional system, namely, either classes ("basic
For, if the basic
classes") or relation extensions ("basic relations" 9.
elements were given as coexisting without properties and without relations, then no constructional step, through which we could advance
beyond them would be possible. We shall proceed, as is explained later,
by placing, not classes, but relation extensions, the basic relations, at the
beginning of the constructional system. These, and not the basic elements,
form the undefined basic objects (basic concepts) of the system, and all
other objects of the system are constructed from them. As far as construction is concerned, the basic relations take precedence over the basic

EXAMPLES. 1. One could choose as basic elements the electrons
(including the protons, with positive elementary charges) and, as basic
relations, the spatial and temporal relations between them. Properties of
the electromagnetic field can then be defined through implication statements about the acceleration of electrons. The atoms of all chemical elements are constructed as certain constellations of electrons, and
gravitation is constructed through implication statements about the
acceleration of atoms. The derivation of the remaining constants and
other concepts of physical science then no longer offers any principal
difficulties since, in physics, they can all be reduced to magnetic fields,
electrons, and gravitation. The perceptible physical things and properties
can then easily be constructed from the things and properties of physical
science, since they are uniquely determined by them.
2. We may choose as basic elements the space-time points of the fourdimensional space-time continuum and, as basic relations, their relative
location in the continuum and the one-many relations between real
numbers and space-time points which correspond to the individual components of the potential functions: the electromagnetic fourdimensional
vector field and the tensor field of gravitation. According to the general
theory of relativity in Weyl's formulation, all concepts of physical science
can in principle be derived from these data. The electrons are constructed as locations of peculiar distributions of potentials 57 or as
topological individuals through their relative locations; all other derivations take place as in ( 1).

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

100

3. We may choose as basic elements the world points, in the sense of
elements of the "world lines" of physical points (on the basis of
Minkowski's formulation). They are not identical with the space-time
points of the second example, but stand in a many-one relation to them.
As basic relations, we may here choose coincidence and local time-order.
From this we have to construct at first all topological, but then also the
metrical, determinations of the space-time world (cf. Carnap [Abhang.],
[Logistik] 1 37; Reichenbach [Axiomatik]), and finally the vector and
tensor field of the above-mentioned theory of Weyl; after this, the construction proceeds as above.

After we have constructed the physical objects by proceeding from
such a physical basis, we can construct the other object types according
to our earlier considerations concerning the reducibility of psychological objects to physical ones and of cultural objects to psychological
ones (8 55 ff.).

63. Possible Psychological Bases
In selecting a psychological basis, either of the following alternatives is
possible: the autopsychological (or "solipsistic") or the general psychological 5s basis. With the autopsychological basis, the available basic
elements are restricted to those psychological objects which belong to
only one subject. As we have seen above, in this case the psychological
domain must be divided into two constructionally different parts: from
the autopsychological objects we first construct the physical ones, and
only then can we construct the heteropsychological objects. If we
choose the general psychological basis, then the psychological objects
of all psychological subjects are taken as basic elements. This method
has the advantage that the construction of the totality of psychological
objects is easier; it is carried out in precisely the same way in which the
autopsychological objects are constructed if we choose the autopsychological basis. If we select the general psychological basis, this construction completes the task of constructing all psychological objects, while,
if we choose the autopsychological basis, we still have, after the construction of the physical, the entirely different and quite di5cult task of
constructing the heteropsychological. In both cases we have, in addition,
the choice of different types of psychological objects as basic elements,
for example, the undivided experiences (of all subjects or of the one
subject) or the parts of these experiences, or certain kinds of parts of
5s

allgemeinpsychisch

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM 1 101

experiences, for example, the sensations. We shall consider these possibilities when we discuss the autopsychological basis ( $ 67), which we
shall choose.

64. The Choice of the Autopsychological Basis
In spite of the indicated advantages of the general psychological basis,
we choose the autopsychological basis for our constructional system. The
most important reason for this lies in our intention to have the constructional system reflect not only the logical-constructional order of the
objects, but also their epistemic order ( 5 54). It is for the same reason
that we excluded the system form with physical basis, various versions of
which were logically possible. Occasionally, one encounters the opinion
that, not autopsychological, but general psychological, objects form the
basis even in the epistemic order of objects, but this position cannot be
maintained in view of the fact that it is impossible to recognize heteropsychological objects without the mediating recognition of physical
ones (8 58).
The second reason for preferring a system form with an autopsychological basis is a formal-logical one. For, even if a constructional system
with a general psychological basis reflected the epistemic order of
objects, a system with an autopsychological basis still has the advantage
that the totality of all objects is constructed from a considerably smaller
basis.
The autopsychological basis is also called solipsistic. We do not thereby
subscribe to the solipsistic view that only one subject and its experiences
are real, while the other subjects are nonreal. The differentiation between
real and nonreal objects does not stand at the beginning of the constructional system. As far as the basis is concerned, we do not make a
distinction between experiences which subsequent constructions allow us
to differentiate into perceptions, hallucinations, dreams, etc. This difTerentiation and thus the distinction between real and nonreal objects occurs
only at a relatively advanced constructional level (cf. 8 170 ff .). At the
beginning of the system, the experiences must simply be taken as they
occur. We shall not claim reality or nonreality in connection with these
experiences; rather, these claims will be "bracketed" (i.e., we will
exercise the phenomenological "withholding of judgment", irox$, in
Husserl's sense ( [Phanomenol.] ยง $ 3 1, 32).
Within the autopsychological realm, the basis must be still more
precisely delimited. The term "psychological" could perhaps be thought

102

1 T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

of as comprehending unconscious occurrences, but the basis consists only
in conscious appearances (in the widest sense): all experiences belong
to it, no matter whether o r not we presently o r afterward reflect upon
them. Thus, we prefer to speak of the strearn of experience. The basis
could also be described as the given, but we must realize that this does
not presuppose somebody o r something to whom the given is given
(cf. $ 65). The expression "the given" has the advantage of a certain
neutrality over the expressions "the autopsychological" and "stream of
experience". Strictly speaking, the expressions "autopsychological" and
"stream of experience" should be written in the symbolism introduced in
$ 75 as auto psychological^ and Pstream of experiencep.
REFERENCES. Since the choice of an autopsychological basis
amounts merely to an application of the form and method of solipsism,
but not to an acknowledgment of its central thesis, we may describe our
position as methodological solipsism. This viewpoint has been maintained and expounded in detail, especially by Driesch, as the necessary
starting point of epistemology ([Ordnungsl.] esp. 23). I mention here
some further adherents of this theory, some of whom apply the solipsistic
method only in the initial stages of their systems and eventually make an
abrupt jump to the heteropsychological. Since they do not, for the most
part, employ any precise forms of construction, it is not always clear
whether this transition amounts to a construction on the solipsistic basis,
as is the case in our constructional system, or whether it is a desertion of
that basis.
Von Schubert-Soldern ([Erkth.] 65 ff.) explicitly wants his solipsism
to be taken, not in a metaphysical, but only in a "methodological" sense,
([Solipsismus] 49, 53), a fact that is frequently overlooked by his critics
(Gomperz [Ereignis] 236 ff., Ziehen [Erkth.] 37, 39, 277 ff., Husserl
[Phanomenol.] e.g. 316; necessity to intersubjectivize: 317. Dingler
[Naturphil.] 121 f., Reiningcr [Psychophys.] 51, Jacoby [Ontol.]. Volkelt
([Gewissheit] 55 ff.) chooses a "monological" (that is to say, an autopsychological) starting point for the theory of knowledge and gives a
good criticism of the not (or not purely) autopsychological starting
point of Avenarius, Cornelius, Petzold, and Rehmke. However, the
method which Volkelt uses to break through the limits of individual subjectivity differs considerably from our own. Russell ([External W.] 96 f.,
[Sense-Data] 157 f.) considers the construction of the physical from an
autopsychological basis very desirable, but also very difficult and presently altogether unattainable.
In opposition to the systems mentioned above, many others do not
apply methodological solipsism, and some oppose it explicitly. Mach
([Anal.] 19) is especially conspicuous for his non-autopsychologica1

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

I

103

basis, since it does not seem to be in harmony with the rest of his views.
I do not here wish to enumerate the opponents of an autopsychological
basis, but wish to mention only Frischeisen-Kohler ([Wissensch.]). He
takes as the epistemological subject, not the self, but "consciousness in
general", to which the individual selves are phenomena. It must all the
more be noted that even this opponent cannot escape placing the fundamental phenomenon" of cognition in the autopsychological domain:
"To find a starting point for methodical reflection, we have to go
back to personal experience" (p. 244); "The limitation of the given to
the sphere of my own self cannot be denied" (p. 254); "Thus, from the
beginning of my reflection, I have to rely upon my own, and only my
own, self-consciousness." (p. 265). He especially emphasizes the independence of this fact from one's attitude vis-i-vis the realism problem:
"There are no objects of experience which are common to a number of
experiencing subjects. Even this sentence-no matter how paradoxical
it sounds-is not based upon any hypothesis concerning the reality or
nonreality of the outside world. In order to grasp it, we do not have to
leave the basis of nai've realism." We are even in a position to save ourselves a discussion of the antisolipsistic position of Mach, Schuppe, and
Cassirer by pointing to Frischeisen-Kohler's refutation of these views.
It is all the more difficult to understand how Frischeisen-Kohler can still
think, in spite of these admissions, that he cannot use an autopsychological basis for his theory of knowledge. The explanation probably lies
in the fact that it seems almost impossible to proceed from an autopsychological basis to the cognition and construction of other subjects,
of the heteropsychological, and of an intersubjective external world. It
can be assumed that this was the main reason why some other philosophers, too (for example, Natorp, Rickert [System] 184 ff., and others)
have chosen a non-autopsychologica1 basis. Since construction theory
removes the obstacles, indicating and clearing the way from an autopsychological basis to the heteropsychological and to an intersubjective
world (cf. 0 166, 140, 145-149), there should be no reason left for
adopting any other basis.

65. The Given Does Not Have a Subject
The expressions "autopsychological basis" and "methodological solipsism" are not to be interpreted as if we wanted to separate, to begin
with, the "ipse", or the "self", from the other subjects, or as if we wanted
to single out one of the empirical subjects and declare it to be the
epistemological subject. A t the outset, we can speak neither of other

104

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

T H E WORLD

subjects nor of the self. Both of them are constructed simultaneously on
a higher level. The choice of these expressions merely means that, after
the formulation of the entire constructional system, we shall find various
domains which we call, in conformity with the customary usage, the
domain of the physical, of the psychological (i.e., of the auto- and
heteropsychological), and of the cultural. Any complete constructional
system, no matter what its system form, must contain these domains. In
order to characterize the differences between the system forms, we shall
indicate in which of the object domains the basic elements are located
after the formation of the system is completed. Before the formulation of
the system, the fundamental elements are without properties and do not
fall into specific domains; at this point, we cannot even speak of these
domains and especially not of a differentiation between different subjects.
In our system form, the basic elements are to be called experiences of the
self after the construction has been carried out; hence, we say: in our
constructional system, "my experiences" are the basic elements. (More
precisely, in the terminology of ยง 75 : Pmy experiences*.)
This state of affairs can be explained through an analogy: if we construct from the numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . at first zero and then the
corresponding negative numbers, then step by step the rational numbers,
the real numbers, the complex numbers, then we shall finally characterize
our starting point within the entire system of numbers by saying that we
have chosen the real, positive integers as the initial elements. At the beginning of the construction, the designation of the elements as "real",
"positive", and "integral" is meaningless. It makes sense only after the
construction of the domains of the complex, negative, and fractional
numbers, since it indicates the boundary toward these other domains.
Likewise, the characterizations of the basic elements of our constructional system as "autopsychological", i.e., as "psychological" and as
"mine", becomes meaningful only after the domains of the nonpsychological (to begin with, the physical) and of the "you" have been constructed. Then, however, they are quite meaningful and indicate how this
system differs from other system forms with general psychological or
physical basis. These other basis descriptions are also meaningful, not for
the basic elements as such, but only in view of the system as a whole.
Before the formation of the system, the basis is neutral in any system
form; that is, in itself, it is neither psychological nor physical.
Egocentricity 60 is not an original property of the basic elements, of the

1 105

given. To say that an experience is egocentric does not make sense until
we speak of the experiences of others which are constructed from "my"
experiences. We even must deny the presence of any kind of duality in
the basic experience, as it is often assumed (for example, as "correlation
between object and subject" or otherwise). Frischeisen-Kohler writes,
"Since the beginning of modem philosophy, it is a common feature of all
theories that, in the data which must be considered presuppositions of all
thought . . two components may be separated." [Wissensch.] 190.
These theories are the victims of a prejudice, the main reason for which
is the subject-predicate form of the sentences of our language.
This egocentricity does not seem equally fundamental in the different
sense modalities. To begin with, it seems to hold only for visual perceptions and seems to be connected with spatial disposition and the resulting
awareness of distance. One can conclude this from the fact that the
blind, on the basis of their tactile impressions, do not arrive at a
subject-object dualism, a fact which is oftentimes obscured because the
blind adopt the language of the sighted. Furthermore, the behavior of a
blind man to whom sight has been restored shows that, to begin with,
"optical impressions are not given to them in depth," since these blind
are "still all impression." From this it follows that the experiences of all
the sense modalities, even of sight, are originally simple, undivided experiences and that the self-object division is the result of a synthesis
which is carried out in analogy to the spatial ordering in the synthesis
of visual impressions.

.

REFERENCES. About the indicated experiences of blind persons:
Wittman [Raum] 15 f., based upon Ahlmann [Opt. Vorst.].
Volkelt ([Gewissheit] 59 8.)gives an especially clear account of the
"neutral character" of experiences as basic elements: that they are "my"
experiences and that they are "psychological" can, strictly speaking, be
said about them only after the "you" and the "physical" have been
recognized.
The following philosophers agree that the self is not implicit in the
original data of cognition: Mach [Anal.] 19 ff., v. Schubert-Soldern
[Erkth.] 65 ff., Nietzsche [Willel $1276, 309, 367 ff.: "It is merely a
formulation of our grammatical habits that there must always be something that thinks when there is thinking and that there must always be a
doer when there is a deed." Aster ([Erkenntnisl.] 33), too, refers to the
misleading influence of linguistic forms. Likewise Gomperz [Ereignis],
following Wahle. Ziehen [Erkth.] 50 ff., 279, 445 ff., explicit rebuttal of
Schuppe in [Schuppe]. Dingler [Naturphil.] 120 ff. Schlick [Erkenntnisl.]
147 f. Gatschenberger [Symbola] 151.

106

I T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

On the other hand, with bur notion of the subjectless given, we deviate
from various systems with which we agree in other important aspects:
Schuppe (cf. Ziehen [Schuppe]); Natorp [Psychol.] 2 6 8 . ; Driesch
[Ordnungsl.] 19; Husserl [Phanomenol.] 65, 160; Jacoby [Ontol.] 169;
Russell [Description] 210. We have already referred to FrischeisenKohler [Wissensch.]. The weakness of his position becomes especially
apparent in the following admission (p. 196): " . . . thus the confrontation of subject and object, which we must assume with all its
ramifications for the immediately given, is neither contained in the
actual data of introspection, nor can it be conceptually apprehended. To
impose this distinction upon the given-that is, to construe the given in
analogy to thought-is to introduce a theoretical interpretation." Here,
similar to 5 64, the strange opposition between a fact which FrischeisenKohler admits and that which, in his opinion, "must be assumed." The
reason for this lies presumably in the fact that Frischeisen-Kohler thinks
it to be impossible-as do probably many other proponents of the egocentricity of the given-to advance from a subjectless starting point to
the construction of experiences which contain the self. However, construction theory will show that it can be done.

66. The Autopsychological Basis and the Problem of Objectivity
If the basis of the constructional system is autopsychological, then the
danger of subjectivism seems to arise. Thus, we arc confronted with the
problem of how we can achieve objectivity of knowledge with such a
system form. The requirement that knowledge be objective can be understood in two senses. It could mean objectivity in contrast to arbitrariness:
if a judgment is said to reflect knowledge, then this means that it does
not depend on my whims. Objectivity in this sense can obviously be
required and achieved even if the basis for knowledge is autopsychological.
Secondly, by objectivity is sometimes meant independence from the
judging subject, validity which holds also for other subjects. It is precisely
this intersubjectivity which is an essential feature of "reality"; it serves
to distinguish reality from dream and deception. Thus, especially for
scientific knowledge, intersubjectivity is one of the most important requirements. Our problem now is how science can arrive at intersubjectively valid assertions if all its objects are to be constructed from the
standpoint of the individual subject, that is, if in the final analysis all
statements of science have as their object only relations between "my"

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

107

experiences? Since the stream of experience is different for each person,
how can there be even one statement of science which is objective in this
sense (i.e., which holds for every individual, even though he starts from
his own individual stream of experience)? The solution to this problem
lies in the fact that, even though the material of the individual streams
of experience is completely different, or rather altogether incomparable,
since a comparison of two sensations or two feelings of different subjects,
as far as their immediately given qualities are concerned, is absurd,
certain structural properties are analogous for all streams of experience.
Now, if science is to be objective, then it must restrict itself to statements
about such structural properties, and, as we have seen earlier, it can
restrict itself to statements about structures, since all objects of knowledge are not content, but form, and since they can be represented as
structural entities (cf. $ 15 f.) .
A system form with an autopsychological basis is acceptable only because it is recognized that science is essentially concerned with structure
and that, therefore, there is a way to construct the objective by starting
from the individual stream of experience. Much of the resistance to an
autopsychological basis (or "methodological solipsism") can probably
be traced back to an ignorance of this fact, and many of the other
expressions for the original subject (e.g., "transcendental subject,"
"epistemological subject," "superindividual consciousness," "consciousness in general") can perhaps be thought of as expedients, since from
the natural starting point in the epistemic order of objects, namely, the
autopsychological, no transition to the intersubjective realm seemed
possible (cf. the quotations in $ 64).
Only later, during the formulation of the constructional system itself,
can we demonstrate the precise method for achieving objectivity in the
sense of intersubjectivity ( $ 3 146-149). The preceding general remarks
will suffice for the moment.

67. The Choice o f the Basic Elements: The "Elementary
Experiences"
After deciding to choose an autopsychological basis for our system (i.e.,
the acts of consciousness or experiences of the self), we still must
determine which entities from this general domain are to serve as basic
elements. One could perhaps think of choosing the final constituents of
experience at which one arrives through psychological or phenomenological analysis (such as the most simple sensations, as in Mach [Anal.]),

108

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

or, more generally, psychological elements of different types from which
experiences can be formed. However, upon closer inspection, we realize
that in this case we do not take the given as it is, but abstractions from it
(is., something that is epistemically secondary) as basic elements. It
must be understood that constructional systems which proceed from such
basic elements are as much justified and practicable as, for example,
systems with a physical basis. However, since we wish to require of our
constructional system that it should agree with the epistemic order of the
objects (5 54), we have to proceed from that which is epistemically primary, that is to say, from the "given", i.e., from experiences themselves
in their totality and undivided unity. The above-mentioned constituents,
down to the last elements, are derived from these experiences by relating
them to one another and comparing them (i.e., through abstraction). The
more simple steps of this abstraction are carried out intuitively in prescientific thought already, so that we quite commonly speak, for example, of
visual perceptions and simultaneous auditory perceptions, as if they were
two different constituents of the same experience. The familiarity of such
divisions which are carried out in daily life should not deceive us about
the fact that abstraction is already involved in the procedure. This
applies a fortiori to elements which are discovered only through scientific
analysis. The basic elements, that is, the experiences of the self as units
(which will be more precisely delineated in the sequel), we call elementary experiences.
REFERENCES. In opposition to the "atomizing" school of thought in
psychology and epistemology, which postulates such psychological
"atoms" as, e.g., simple sensations as elements, there is presently more
and more emphasis on the fact that "every state of consciousness is n
unit and is not, strictly speaking, analyzable." (Schlick [Erkenntnisl.]
143 f.; italics mine). In particular, there is more and more proof that, in
perception, the total impression is primary, while sensations and particular feelings, etc., are only the result of an abstracting analysis. This
position has already been clearly indicated by Schuppe [Erkth.] 41, also
[Irnman. Phil.] 17: "The thinking of the individual begins with total
impressions which only reflection analyzes into their simple elements."
Similarly, Cornelius [Einleitg.] 210 f., also Gomperz Weltansch.], with
his doctrine of the "total impression" (as the feeling of unity for the
impression as a whole), emphasizes this point and clarses it with
examples. He also gives a historical survey of related earlier theories. He
mentions William Hamilton, Schuppe, Nietzsche Willel and others.
Reininger [Erk.] 370, makes similar statements and refers to Kant.
The position just discussed has been developed especially by Gestdt

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 109

theory. (Cf. Kohler [Gestaltprobl.] and Wertheimer [Gestaltth.]. It has
become methodologically fruitful, especially in psychology, not ody by
suggesting new ways of asking questions, but also by arriving at materially new findings through a change in outlook. From this theory, new
and important aspects arise for areas other than psychology.
Modern psychological research has confirmed more and more that, in
the various sense modalities, the total impression is epistemically primary,
and that the so-called individual sensations are derived only through
abstractions, even though one says afterward that the perception is
"composed" of them: the chord is more fundamental than the individual
tones, the impression of the total visual field is more fundamental than
the details in it, and again the individual shapes in the visual field are
more fundamental than the colored visual field places, out of which they
are "composed". These psychological investigations have frequently
been undertaken in connection with Gestalt theory. Cf. also Wittmann
[Raum] e.g., 48 ff.; note on page 19 of that work an interesting quotation from F. W. Hagen, who maintained a similar position as early as
1844.
As closely related, we must also mention the philosophical position of
Driesch, with its emphasis upon "totalities" (cf. especially [Ordnungsl.]
and [Ganze]).

In choosing as basic elements the elementary experiences, we do not
assume that the stream of experience is composed of determinate,
discrete elements. We only presuppose that statements can be made
about certain places in the stream of experience, to the effect that one
such place stands in a certain relation to another place, etc. But we do
not assert that the stream of experience can be uniquely analyzed into
such places.

68. The Elementary Experiences are Unanalyzable
The elementary experiences are to be the basic elements of our constructional system. From this basis we wish to construct all other objects of
prescientific and scientific knowledge, and hence also those objects
which one generally calls the constituents of experiences or components
of psychological events and which are found as the result of psychological
analysis (for example, partial sensations in a compound perception,
different simultaneous perceptions of different senses, quality and intensity components of a sensation, etc.). From this results a special
difficulty.
We remember that class and relation extension are to be the only

110

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

ascension forms of the constructional system ( 5 40). Starting from any
basic elements and basic relations, we can form only objects of the following kinds in the constructional system: on the first constructional
level, classes of elements and relations 62 between elements; on the second level, only ( 1 ) classes of such classes, or classes of relations 62 of
the first level, and (2) relations 62 between such classes, or relations 62
between relations 63 on the first level, or relations 62 between classes on
the first level and elements, etc. It is obvious that construction, when
carried out with the aid of these ascension forms is always synthetic,
never analytic. Even if we were to suppose that the basic elements are
themselves again classes of other elements, classes of "fundamental elements", we could not construct these fundamental elements with the aid
of the given ascension forms. The basic elements of the constructional
system cannot be analyzed through construction. Thus, the elementary
experiences cannot be analyzed in our system since this system takes
them as basic elements.
This fact agrees very well with our conception that the elementary
experiences are essentially unanalyzable units, which has, after all, led
us to choose them as basic elements. However, it could appear now that
the previously indicated aim, namely, to construct, among other things,
all objects of science and also the known psychological elements (i.e.,
the so-called constituents of experience), would now become unattainable. This difficulty is of fundamental importance for construction theory
and requires, for its resolution, the development of a special constructional method. This is now to be discussed in more detail.

69. The Problem o f Dealing with Unanalyzable Units
We overcome the difficulty which results from the fact that elementary
experiences are unanalyzable by introducing a constructional procedure
which, even though synthetic, leads from any basic elements to objects
which can serve as formal substituents for the constituents of the basic
elements. We call them formal substituents, because all assertions which
hold for the constituents hold, in analogous form, also, for them. We c d
this procedure quasi analysis. (It is derived from the Frege-Russell "principle of abstraction": cf. the remark at the end of $ 73.) It is of importance wherever we are concerned with unanalyzable units of any k i d ,
that is, with objects which, in their immediate given-ness, do not exhibit
any constituents or properties or aspects. These objects are given, as it
62

Relation

1 111

were, only in point form and can therefore be treated only synthetically;
nevertheless, as a result of our procedure, we can ascribe various characteristics to them. Properties and constituents are here taken to be the
same thing; with psychological processes, for example, one cannot use
the expression "constituent" in its original, spatial sense, but only in
the sense of the equally figurative expression of "different aspects" or
"characteristics".
If unanalyzable units of any kind are given and if we are to discuss
them at all, then statements about them must also be givcn. We have
previously divided the descriptions of objects through statements into
property descriptions and relation descriptions ( $ 10). The statements
about unanalyzable units cannot be given as property descriptions, since
this would amount to saying that we ascribe characteristics to these units,
which would contradict the concept we have of them. The statements can
only be pure relation descriptions. Let us investigate especially the case
where the relation descriptions are given in extensional form, i.e., in the
form of a pair list,63for example, through enumeration (or other characterization) of the pairs of correlated members (cf. ยง $ 32, 34). Notice
especially the case where the unanalyzable units in question form the
basic elements of the constructional system; in this case, the relation
description is possible only in extensional form, since the basic relations 64
of a constructional system are given only in extension ( $ 43, 45).
Generally speaking, and without restriction to the particular problem
of elementary experiences, quasi analysis is to achieve the following:
unanalyzable units of any kind, a pair list of which is presupposed, are to
be manipulated with the constructional ascension forms of class and
relation extension (i.e., with synthetic methods) in such a way that the
result is a formal substitution for proper analysis (i.e., the analysis into
constituents or properties), which cannot be carried out in this case. Because of the required formal analogy between the results of quasi analysis
and those of proper analysis, one can suppose that a certain formal
analogy will obtain between these two procedures themselves. Thus, we
investigate, to begin with, which formal characteristics we can find in the
Procedure of a proper analysis which proceeds on the basis of nothing but
a pair list of the objects to be analyzed. Then we shall see that the desired
Procedure of quasi analysis can be developed analogously.
___5_

"Since only dyadic relations are discussed in the sequel, I have translated "Relati~nsbeschreibun~''as "pair list", even though "list of n-tuples" would have been

112

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

70. The Procedure o f Proper A~ialysison the Basis o f a Pair List
I n the case of proper analysis, we are concerned neither with points that
have no properties nor with unanalyzable units, but with objects which
have several constituents (or characteristics). Analysis consists in inferring these constituents, which are initially unknown, from other data,
e.g., from a pair list. Let us illustrate this with a simple example.
EXAMPLE. Let our aim be the analysis of a number of things, each
of which has one or more colors. Let there be altogether five different
colors. Let us define the relation of "color kinship" in such a way that it
is to hold for two things if these have at least one color in common.
Let the things be individually designated, for example, by numbers. Now
let us assume that we do not know of any of the things which colors it
has. All we have is a pair list (i.e., we know only the extension of the
relation of color kinship: we are told all pairs for which this relation
holds, but we are not told which color these two things have in common).
In other words, the relation extension of color kinship is completely
given (cf. $ 8 10 and 34). Now, our task consists in inferring from these
data the distribution of colors. We cannot proceed by choosing one ot
the things at random and determining all its color kin on the basis of
the pair list, for it does not follow that all these are color akin to each
other.
The task of analysis is attained once we succeed in determining the
"color classes". Let us call the class of all things which have a certain
color in common a "color class" (e.g., the class of the red [completely
red or also red] things, of blue things, etc.). There are, in all, five color
classes which partially overlap. What is the connection between the color
classes and the relation of color kinship? Now, two properties are characteristic for the color classes. The first of these they have always; the
second, most of the time, namely, when conditions are not especially
unfavorable. First of all, any two elements of a color class stand in the
relation of color kinship to one another (because the members of the pair
both have the color which determines the color class). Secondly, the
color classes are the largest possible classes all of whose members are
color-akin (i.e., there is no thing outside of a color class which stands
in the relation of color kinship to all the things in the class). (This second property can occasionally be absent, for example, if one of the five
colors is a "companion" of a second, i.e., if none of the things has the
first color without having the second also.) For example, if blue is a
companion of red, then the blue color class does not have this second
property, for a thing which is red but not blue does not belong to this

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM 1 113

color class and is nevertheless color akin to all things in this class, since
all of them are also red. If there are no systematic connections between
the distributions of the different colors, then this unfavorable case,
namely, that the second property is missing in a color class, becomes
the less likely the smaller the average number of colors of the thing and the
larger the total number of things is. Let us assume that in our case
the unfavorable conditions are not fulfilled (i.e., that the color classes
have both of the characteristic properties). Now we have to determine,
on the basis of the pair list, those classes of things which have
these two properties (in the terminology of logic: the similarity
circles relative to color kinship). This is possible because the two
properties have been described only with reference to couples for which
the indicated relation holds. The classes formed in this way will be the
color classes. In this case, we will find five color classes without, of
course, being able to determine which color belongs to each of them.
c,.
Thus, we must assign arbitrary names to them, for example, c,
Now if we remember that a class does not consist of its elements, but is
a quasi object, whose symbol serves to express that which is common to
the elements of a class ( ยง 37), then we can simply think of the color
c,
class c, as the common color of the elements of c,. Thus c, .
designate the five colors. We do not know, of course, whether c, is red
or green, etc. Now, if one of the things is an element of c, and of c,, but
not an element of any other color class, then we say of it that it has two
colors (i.e., it bears the colors c, and c z ) .In a similar way, we can make
this determination for each one of the things. Thus, the analysis is
complete; we have determined the constituents (or properties) of each
element, even though we have not used the usual names for the qualities,
but have only characterized them as common properties of certain elements, that is, as classes.

...

..

Thus, if a pair list is given whose relation extension signifies agreement in ( a t least) one constituent, then the procedure of proper analysis
consists in establishing the similarity circles associated with the relation
extension, that is to say, the classes which have the following two properties: any two elements of such a class are a pair of the given relation
extension, and no element outside of such a class forms a pair of this relation extension with every element in that class. Classes which are formed
in this way are then assigned to their elements as constituents ( o r
properties).

114

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

7 1. The Procedure of Quasi Analysis
The procedure of quasi analysis for elements which are unanalyzable
units (that is, which have neither constituents nor characteristics) stands
in exact formal analogy to the indicated procedure of proper analysis.
In order to be able to use quasi analysis, it must b e presupposed that a
pair list is given, whose relation extension R has the same general formal
property as the relation extension which forms the basis of ptoper analysis. The latter (in our example, color kinship) indicates agreement in a
constituent and hence is symmetrical and reflexive (i.e. it is a "similarity";
cf. 5 1 1 ) . If R is likewise symmetrical and reflexive, then we can proceed
as with proper analysis; that is, as if R also meant agreement in a constituent. Thus, we form similarity circles with respect to R (i.e., those
classes c which have the following two properties: each pair in c is a n R
pair; no element outside of c forms a n R pair with every element in c ) .
I n this case, too, we envisage the similarity circles (which correspond to
the color classes of our example) as common properties of the elements
and hence assign them to these elements as characteristics. But since it is
presupposed that these elements are unanalyzable units, they cannot,
strictly speaking, have characteristics or constituents, nor can this be a
case of proper analysis. I t is for this reason that we designate the procedure as quasi analysis and the entities which we find through this procedure and which we assign to the elements, as "quasi characteristics" or
quasi constituents. Thus, for example, if we have found the similarity
circles ql, q2, . . . (i.e., if we have found for each such circle the list of
elements which belong to it) and if a certain element belongs, for example, to the classes ql, q3, q4,then we say: this element, although as an
unanalyzable unit it does not have proper constituents, has three quasi
constituents, namely, ql, q3,q4. Thus, the quasi analysis has been carried
out and meets the requirements which we have previously laid down for
it ( $ 69).
EXAMPLE. Let us clarify the significance of quasi analysis through
an example. As a domain of unanalyzable units, we use the so-called
"compound" chords. As a phenomenon, i.e., as it is given in sensation
(in contrast to the viewpoint of physics and acoustics), a chord is a
uniform totality which is not composed of constituents. It may seem to
us as if the chord we hear when we strike the keys c, e, g of the piano
has three parts; however, this is due only to the fact that the character
of our perception is partially determined by the tone kinship of this

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 115

chord with innumerable other chords which are already known to us:
the chord c-e-g is akin to all the chords which (acoustically speaking)
contain c (one of these may be c alone). Furthermore, our original
chord is akin in tone to all chords which contain e and likewise to all
which contain g. Thus, it belongs to three chord classes, and this brings
about the impression that it has three parts.
Let us now assume that we have not been given any qualitative characterization, but only a pair list of the chords which one can hear, for
example, in a piano, that is to say, a pair list on the basis of tone kinship.
Since this relation extension is reflexive and symmetrical, we can apply
the procedure of quasi analysis to it. On the basis of the given pair list
(i.e., on the basis of the list of pairs which are akin in tone), we determine the similarity circles. These similarity circles stand in exact formal
analogy to the color classes of the earlier example of proper analysis.
With the aid of this analogy, one can easily convince himself that they
are identical with the above-mentioned chord classes (i.e., with the
classes of such chords which [acoustically speaking] coincide in a constituent tone). Thus, for each "constituent tone" (in the language of
acoustics), whether or not it occurs among the chords in isolation, we
obtain such a quasi analytic similarity circle (i.e., for example, the
similarity circles, c, d, e, etc.). Now we assign to each chord those
similarity circles to which it belongs as quasi constituents. Since the
chord c-e-g is an element of similarity circles c, e, and g, we assign to it
these three classes, namely, c, e, g, as quasi constituents. (The threefold
sign (c-e-g) of this chord refers initially only to its origin, namely, the
depression of three keys of a piano, and does not refer to a tripartition
of the uniform chord.) We said previously that the chord c-e-g does not,
properly speaking, consist of three parts and that the impression of tripartition which it makes upon a trained ear is due to the fact that it
belongs to three chord cIasses. Now we see that this impression of
tripartition is the result of an intuitively performed quasi analysis. In
hearing the chord, we detect-provided that we have already heard a
sufficient number of other chords-three constituents, not in the sense
of parts, but in the sense of three different directions in which we can
proceed from it to other chords (i.e., to entire chord classes which stand
to one another in the relation of tone kinship).
As we here identify what is generally called the constituent tones of a
chord with chord classes (i.e., with classes of chords), it is important to
recall the character of classes as quasi objects (5 37). A chord class is
neither the whole nor the collection of its elements. Thus, it is not the
chord phenomenon which would result if the chords of this class were
to be sounded in some temporal sequence or other, or even all together.
A chord class, as any class, is that which its elements have in common.

118

I

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

But this, again, is not to be understood in the sense of a common constituent, for the chords have none such. The "class" is not, properly
speaking, an object. Its symbol merely serves to make those assertions
which hold equally for all its elements. It is apparent, then, that the
characteristic or, more precisely, the quasi characteristic, c, cannot mean
anything but the mutual kinship of all the chords which (acoustically
speaking) "contain" c. If one were to hear the chord c-e-g, without
having previously heard any musical chords, one would hardly think of
it as having three parts. Even though we say that we recognize the tone
c as a constituent tone in the chord c-e-g, we should not think of it as a
proper constituent of this chord, but only as a quasi constituent. Otherwise, one would come to the conclusion (which has indeed sometimes
been maintained) that the chord c-e-g consists of the individual tones
c, e, g, and, in addition to them, of something new which comprises the
actual character of the chord. Thus we would assume four constituents,
where in truth there is only an unanalyzable unit without any
constituents.
The importance of the procedure of quasi analysis becomes evident
when we recall that, in the position here maintained, the elementary
experiences (i.e., the basic elements of the constructional system) are
unanalyzable units and that many psychological, especially phenomenal,=O objects, which traditional psychology thought of as being compounds, are likewise unanalyzable. I n the case of such entities, one can
apply the language of analysis (i.e., one can speak of their constituents
o r components, etc.), but one should never forget that he is, strictly
speaking, concerned with quasi constituents, since these entities-as they
were originally given-have no proper constituents. (Cf. the references
to recent psychological positions, especially Gestalt theory, and to holistic
notions in philosophy in $ 67.) An example is the notion of chords as
indivisible units, which we have just discussed a t some length. In summary, analysis or, more precisely, quasi analysis of an essentially unanalyzable entity into several quasi constituents means placing the entity
in several kinship contexts on the basis of a kinship relation, where the
unit remains undivided.

72. Quasi Analysis on the Basis of a Part Similarity Relation 67
The indicated procedure of quasi analysis treats the relation extension of
a given pair list as if it meant agreement in a constituent part. Conse88
67

sinnesphanomenal
Teil~nlichkeitsrelation

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

117

quently, the results are called quasi constituents. There is still another
form of relation description, which we can consider analogous to quasi
analysis. I t is not the relation of having constituents that are identical,
but the relation of having constituents that are alike. This kind of relation description gives rise to a second type of quasi analysis which does
not have the same general importance as the first, but which must be
explained because it is later applied in the constructional system.
EXAMPLE. Let us again begin with a comprehensible example. Let a
large number of things be of such a nature that each of them has one or
several colors. Here a much larger number of things is required than in
the case of the first type of relation description ( ยง 70). However, in this
case, the number of different colors is not to be restricted to five, but a
very large number of colors from all parts of the color solid are to occur.
We call two things color similar if, among other colors, they each have a
color which is similar to that of the other (i.e., which, on the color solid,
has a distance from the other which is smaller than a certain arbitrarily
chosen magnitude). As in the earlier example, no information about
these things is to be given, except enumeration of the pairs of this relation (i.e., pair list). It is impossible in this case to determine directly the
color classes (i.e., the classes of all and only those things which, among
other colors, bear a certain color); this can be done only through a
complicated procedure which we shall develop later. On the other hand,
we can easily determine a different type of class, namely, the "color
similarity circles". All else develops from them.
The largest possible parts of the color solid, which contain nothing but
colors that are similar to one another, are spheres which partially overlap
each other, and whose diameter is the arbitrarily fixed maximal distance
of similarity (which may be different in different parts of the color
solid). Thus, to these color spheres belong not things, but colors. The
class of things which have one of the colors of a certain color sphere is
called a color similarity circle. We can now easily see that the characterizing properties of the color similarity circles, as based on color similarity, are the same as those of the color classes as based on color kinship
in the earlier example: any two things belonging to a color similarity
circle are color similar; no thing which does not belong to a certain color
similarity circle is color similar to all things belonging to this circle.
Hence, the color similarity circles are the similarity circles based on
color similarity. (As in the earlier case, it is again required that certain
unfavorable conditions are not present if we are to arrive at a correct
determination of these classes. For example, it must not be the case that
a thing a, even though it does not bear any of the blue colors, on the basis
of which other things form the color similarity circle c, is nevertheless

118

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

"accidentally" color similar to all these things in c by being similar in a
color other than blue to each thing that belongs to c. We shall later
return to this point.)
So far, we have derived only the color similarity circles and not yet
the color classes, but, as we have indicated in the earlier example, only
the color classes can be envisaged as the representatives of the colors
themselves and can, as such, be assigned to the things. Now, the color
classes are to the individual places of the color solid what the color
similarity circles are to the color spheres. Since the individual places of
the color solid are the largest parts of the color solid, which remain
always undivided in the mutual overlapping of the color spheres, we can
determine the color classes correspondingly as the largest subclasses of
the color similarity circles which remain undivided through the mutual
overlapping of these circles.
As we can see from the example, quasi analysis o n the basis of a part
similarity relation P consists first of all in establishing similarity circles
relative to P, just as in the previous case. In this case, the quasi constituents are derived from the similarity circles only indirectly, namely, as
the largest subclasses which remain undivided by the mutual overlapping
of the similarity circles. (This explanation is not altogether precise; we
shall give a more precise one later o n when we explain the application
of this procedure [$$ 81, 1121.)
In view of the formal analogy of the first step in this second type of
procedure with the first type of procedure, we can always cany out this
step without having to decide antecedently whether the relation extension
of a given pair list, to which we want to apply quasi analysis, is to be
construed as part identity (i.e., agreement in a quasi constituent) or as
part similarity (i.e., approximate agreement in a quasi constituent).
After the first step has been carried out, the decision can easily be made,
for similarity circles behave toward one another in an entirely different
way in the first case than in the second. In the second case, there is a
multiple mutual overlapping of similarity circles. Thus they can be put
into one or more systems, such that those similarity circles which are
close to one another in the system have a large number of elements in
common. In the first case, on the other hand, similarity circles are either
mutually exclusive (namely, if their elements each have only one quasi
constituent) or else they have only insignificant parts in common with
one another, and, even then, an order does not generally result from this
fact. Thus, if we do not know whether a given similarity relation Q is to
be envisaged as part identity or as part similarity, then we must investigate the similarity circles on the basis of Q as to whether they show

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

119

mutual overlappings characteristic of the first or of the second case. In
the first case, the similarity circles themselves must be taken as quasi
constituents. In the second case, the quasi constituents must be derived
from the similarity circles, namely, as the largest subclasses which are
not divided through the overlapping of the similarity circles.

7 3 . Quasi Analysis on the Basis o f a Transitive Relation
For a relation extension R, on whose basis a quasi analysis is carried out,
we have so f a r presupposed only that it is symmetrical and reflexive. The
indicated procedure is independent of the property of transitivity (about
this concept, cf. $ 11). I n the examples which we have discussed so far,
we were concerned with relation extensions which were neither transitive
nor intransitive. However, the case of a quasi analysis on the basis of a
transitive relation extension deserves special treatment, for precisely this
case obtains frequently in the formation of concepts in various different
fields, and, moreover, it is of a special formal simplicity. The classes
which are to be formed as quasi constituents fulfill, in this case too, the
previously indicated conditions, but they can be defined also in another,
simpler way. Since in this case R is transitive, symmetrical, and reflexive
(i.e., an "equivalence", $ 1 1), it follows that no element outside of a similarity circle can be akin to any element within the similarity circle, for
then it would have to be akin to all other elements of the similarity
circle, and thus, contrary to our assumption, would have to belong to it.
From this it follows, first, that if R is transitive, then the similarity circles
do not have any elements in common. Of the two conceptions of a relaidentity and part
tion extension which were discussed in $ 72-part
similarity--only the first can obtain in this case: the similarity circles
of R must here themselves be considered the quasi constituents; in this
case, we shall call them abstraction classes of R. I t follows, moreover,
that the class of elements which stand to any given element in the relation (extension) R forms an abstraction class. Hence, the abstraction
classes and thus the quasi constituents can here be defined as the (nonempty) classes of elements which are akin to a given element.
REFERENCES. The procedure of quasi analysis in this simplest case
of a transitive relation extension corresponds to the "principle of abstraction", which was first explicitly mentioned by Russell ([Principles]
166; cf. also Frege [Grundlg.] 73 ff.). It had been used previously by
Frege and then by Whitehead and Russell for the construction of the
cardinal numbers (cf. 5 40). Cf. Couturat [Prinz.] 51 ff.; Weyl [Handb.]

120

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

9 f., there also a reference to Leibniz; Carnap [Logistik] 120. Whitehead

and Russell have also referred to the extramathematical applicability of
the principle and have used it for their constructions; cf. Russell
External W.] 124 ff.

74. About Analysis and Synthesis
Later on, in the formulation of the lower levels of our outline of the constructional system, we shall illustrate the application of the procedure of
quasi analysis to the elementary experiences as basic elements. Then we
shall see how this procedure puts us in a position, for example, to construct the different sense modalities and, within the sense modalities, the
various sensory qualities, without disclaiming the unanalyzable character
of elementary experiences.
Many epistemological systems (especially the positivistic ones) which
are otherwise closely related to our constructional system have used,
not experiences themselves, but sensory elements or other constituents
of experiences as basic elements, without paying heed to their character
as abstractions. The reason for this was perhaps that it seemed impossible to construct all objects of psychology and, among them also, those
"constituents of experiences" if experiences themselves were chosen as
basic elements. After we have shown, through the procedure of quasi
analysis, that this impossibility is only apparent, there seems to be no
reason for any epistemological position (and this holds especially for a
positivistic one) why elementary experiences should not be acknowledged
to have the character of unanalyzable units and why they should not be
taken as basic elements.
In order to avoid any misunderstanding, let me emphasize again that,
with the conception of elementary experiences as unanalyzable units, we
do not brand a psychological statement, such as "this experience (or this
act of consciousness) consists of a visual perception with such and such
constituents, of an auditory sensation, of a feeling with such and such
components, etc." as false or even meaningless. All we assert is that in
such a statement the expression "constituents" refers only to quasi constituents. In other words, we say that every so-called constituent relates
to the experience as the chord class c in the above example ( ยง 7 1) to
the chord c-e-g, namely, as an entity which is constructed through kinship relations, that is, a "quasi constituent".
REFERENCES. Ow position is closely related to that of Cornelius:
"The value of such an analysis does not consist in the recognition of

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

121

every single state of consciousness-no analysis of these can be possible
-but in the recognition of regular co~ectionsbetween various such
states." [Einleitg.] 314. Cf. also the quotations in 167.
If class and relation extension are acknowledged as the only constructional steps ( $ 681, then the methodological unanalyzability of the basic
elements follows for any constructional system, and, from the choice of
the essentially unanalyzable elementary experiences ( 5 67) follows a
materially determined 88 unanalyzability. From this arise the following
consequences with respect to the general relationship between analysis
and synthesis of scientific objects, which we assume to be constructed
according to our constructional system. Since every object of science is
constructed from the basic elements, to analyze it means to trace back
the procedure of construction from the object itself to those elements
which are required for its construction. Any analyzing beyond this point
will have to take on the form of quasi analysis, since proper analysis is
no longer possible. The same holds when the object to be analyzed is
not a constructed entity, but a basic element. Now, quasi analysis leads
to entities which we have called quasi constituents (in order to stay close
to established usage, which calls them constituents). But this is done by
forming classes of elements and, furthermore, relation extensions of these
classes; hence, by way of synthesis, not analysis. We can therefore say:
Quasi analysis is a synthesis which wears the linguistic garb of an analysis.
Since the basic elements are not accessible to proper analysis, but only
either to quasi analysis or to other constructional procedures, all of which
are synthetic, it follows, if we concentrate not upon the linguistic expression but upon the actual nature of the procedure, that these elements are
accessible exclusively to synthesis and not to analysis. All other objects
are synthetic entities constructed from the basic elements and analyzable
only to the point where these basic elements are reached again. Analysis
is possible only i f , and to the extent in which, synthesis has preceded; it
is nothing but a retracing of the path of synthesis from the final structure
to intermediate entities and finally-if the analysis is "complete" in the
sense of construction theory-to the basic elements. To be sure, an analysis is then not yet "complete" in the scientific sense, but its continuation
is then a quasi analysis (i.e., a new synthesis).

122

1

2. THE BASIC RELATIONS

7 5 . The Basic Relations as Basic Concepts o f the System
We have realized earlier ( $ 61) that, to lay down the basis of a constructional system, we need not only the basic elements, but also certain
initial ordering concepts,i0 since otherwise it is not possible to produce
any constructions starting from the basic elements. The question whether
these first ordering concepts are to be given the form of classes ("basic
classes") or of relation extensions ("basic relations") remained at first
open. But after the basic elements were chosen ( $ 67) and the elementary experiences which were chosen turned out to be units unanalyzable in principle, it appeared that any assertion about them would have
to have the form of a pair list ( $ 69). From this it follows that (one or
more) basic relations must be chosen as the first ordering concepts. These
basic relations, and not the basic elements, form the undefined basic
concepts of the system. The basic elements are constructed from the
basic relations (as their field).
REFERENCES. Cassirer ([Substanzbegr.] 292 ff.) has shown that a
science which has the aim of characterizing unique entities through
contexts of laws without loss of individuality must utilize, not class
("generic") concepts, but rela~ionalconcepts, since these can lead to
the formation of series and thus to the establishment of systems of
ordering. Since one can easily make the transition from relations to
classes, and since the opposite is possible only very rarely, it follows that
it is relation extensions which must initially be posited.
Thus, two entirely different and frequently hostile philosophical positions have the merit of both having discovered the necessary basis of the
constructional system. Positivism has emphasized that the only material
of cognition consists in the undigested experientially given. It is here that
we have to look for the basic elements of the constructional system.
Transcendental idealism, especially the Neo-Kantian school (Rickert,
Cassirer, Bauch), has justly emphasized that these elements do not
suffice. Order concepts, our basic relations, must be added.
We want to determine the basic relations in such a way that they are
isogenous ( S 29) to one another (i.e., that they are all of the same level,
$ 41). In fact, the terms of each of the basic relations are never to be
60

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

Grundrelationen
Ordnungssetzungen

/

123

mything but elementary experiences. In order to form the basic relations, we must now consider which relations between the elementary
experiences are to be considered fundamental. We are not here concerned with the quest for psychologically fundamental relations or relations which are of especial importance for the processes of consciousness.
Since the basic relations are to serve as the basis for the construction of
all objects (of cognition), they must be chosen in such a way that,
through them, all recognizable states of affairs can be expressed. According to our detailed discussion ( $ 3 50, 51), expressibility is to be
understood only in the sense of a definite description; here we pay attention only to logical and not to epistemic value, nor are we concerned
with the question whether, in the actual occurrence of a process of
cognition, a state of &airs which can be expressed through certain basic
relations f l is actually derived from these basic relations. It happens occat
sionally that a certain state of affairs is fundamental and c a ~ o be
reduced to simpler ones, as far as the psychology of cognition is concerned, while it is logically dependent upon others in such a way that
it can be constructed from them and that it therefore does not have to
be postulated as a basic relation. We shall later on find examples for this.
In searching for the basic relations, we have to pay especial attention
initially to the requirements of the construction of physical objects (i.e.,
we shall test our findings by applying them to facts of perception).
Whether we need other basic relations for the construction of objects of
higher levels (heteropsychological or cultural), we shall consider afterward. The present investigations whether certain relations are required
as basic relations and especially whether they are sufficient for the demands that we put upon them can only be provisional. The correctness
and appropriateness in the choice of the basic relations can be confirmed
only through the fact that, in the formulation of the constructional system, the most important constructions, upon which all else rests, can be
carried out with the aid of the chosen basic relations. This logical performance is the essential criterion for the basic relations. On the other
hand, an investigation of whether a certain relation is fundamental as
far as the psychology of cognition is concerned has mostly heuristic value.
In order to discuss which relations are meant as basic relations and
what entities can be constructed from them, we have to speak of the
experiences in the customary factual language,72in this case, the lanFrom here to the end of 575, "basic relation" is a translation of "Grundbeziehung".

Sachverhaltssprache

124

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

guage of psychological analysis: we have to speak of their constituents,
of sensations, of the various senses, of quality, intensity, etc. In using
these expressions, we do not mean to suggest that these constituents, etc.,
are presupposed for the construction. This would lead to a vicious circle.
The only purpose of these expressions is to indicate certain known states
of affairs, especially fundamental relations between the elementary experiences. This can only be done in a mode of expression as it is customary
in the discussion of experiences and their relations, hence, in the Ianguage of psycholw. In Chapters C and D we shall enclose, for clarity's
sake, expressions which are to be understood in this way in psymbols
(e.g., Dqualitiesp). If an expression does not belong to the factual language, that is, if it is not meant in the sense of customary usage, but
relates to the constructional system (hence, to a constructional definition,
which either has already been given or the formulation of which is intended) or else, if it relates to an undefined basic concept of the system,
then it will be encloscd in c-symbols (e.g., 'qualitiesc). (We shall not
use this symbolism in headings and in reference remarks.)
EXAMPLES. When we speak of pconstituents of experiencesp, then
this does not contradict the notion of 'elementary experiencesCas unanalyzable units, for by the expression "pconstituentsp", we mean the
commonly understood entities. We express through the p-symbols that we
have adopted this nomenclature without wanting to express the contention that we are here concerned with actual constituents. It is after all
one of the problems to be dealt with, to find out what these entities
actually are, namely, how they can be constructed and how they are
then to be described in constructional language.
The expression "esensation qualitiesc" or
will be used to
refer to the
classesCas soon as these classes are constructed or at
least when the type of their construction has been indicated (Q81). On
the other hand, the expression "psensation qualitiesp" or "pqualitiesp"
shall mean what is commonly intended by this word. This distinction is
necessary in order to be able to deal with the question of whether the
constructed 'qualitiesc are really of such a nature that they can represent
the known Pqualitiesp, e.g., the Psensation qualitiesp. We must likewise
make a distinction between 'time orderc and ptime orderp, etc.
The pelementary experiencesp are the known Ptotal objects of psychologyp, the Pprocesses of consciousnessP. The Celementary experiencesc
are propertyless, pointlike arguments of relations. The Pefementary
experiencesp have pconstituentsp, e.g., psensation qualitiesp. The Celementary experiencesc have cquasi constituentsc, e.g., 'sensation qualitiesc or 'quality classesc to which they belong as elements to classes.

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRU!ZTIONAL SYSTEM

]

125

76. Part Identity
In order to be able to construct the physical world, we need certain
pconstituents of elementary experiences, especially sensations with their
determinations of quality and intensity, later on also spatial and temporal
order which must refer back to certain characteristics of sensations which
themselves do not have to be of a spatial or temporal nature in the
proper sensep.
The Pconstituents of elementary experiencesp will have to be quasi
constituents, since in our system the 'elementary experiencesc are indivisible units. PEvery sensation quality, whether it is a color, a tone, a
fragrance, etc.P, will have to be a Pcommon property of those elementary
experiencesp in which it occurs as a Pconstituentp (i.e., as a quasi constituent). This Pcommon propertyp is constructionally represented as the
class of the appropriate Celementary experiencesc
classc").
Above, we have discussed in some detail the fact that a class is not the
whole or the collection of its elements, but a property which they have
in common ( $ 37). This class could be constructed, for example, for
every psensation quality" through the procedure of quasi analysis on the
basis of the relation of Pagreement of two elementary experiences in such
a qualityp. Thus we consider that relation which pholds between two elementary experiences, x and y, if and only if in x there occurs an experience constituent a and in y an experience constituent b such that a and b
agree in all characteristic^,'^ namely, in quality in the narrower sense,
in intensity, and in the location sign 74 which corresponds to the place in
the sensory field, provided that the sense modality in question has these
characteristics. Thus, two color sensations agree with one another if they
agree in hue, saturation, brightness, and in location sign (i.e., in the place
in the visual field); likewise, two (simple) tones, if they agree in pitch
and loudnessp. The just-discussed relation of Pagreement of two elementary experiences in an experience constituentp is a kind of part
identity; we call it, in brief, "Ppart identityp". For the logistic formulation
of the constructional system, we assign to this relation the symbol "Pi",
SO that " x Pi y" means: 'the elementary experiences (i.e., the elements
of the constructional system) x and y are part identical'; and this means
pthe elementary experiences x and y are part identicalp (in the previously
indicated sense). Since one can envisage the relation of Ppart identityp
in allen Bestirnmungsstiicken

Lokalzeichcn

128

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 127

as a fundamental fact of cognition, it seems reasonable to introduce the
relation "Pi" as a basic relation. But we shall see later on that this is not
very useful, since it can be derived from another relation which is likewise required for construction, but which itself cannot be derived from
ppart identityp.
We have already seen that, from Ppart identityp, we can either derive,
through quasi analysis, the Psensation qualitiesp, or, if these can be
obtained from another basic relation, one can conversely derive Ppart
identityp from the Psensation qualitiesp. In our construction we shall
employ this second method.
Among the Psense modalitiesp we always wish to include the Pdomain
of the e m ~ t i o n s p This
. ~ ~ holds not only for the above explanation of Ppart
identityp, but also for the subsequent investigations. We do not wish to
assert thereby (but we also do not wish to deny) that Pemotions are
sensationsp. However, we need a short expression for pthe domains of
constituents of experiences which are either the sense modalities or the
domain of the emotionsp. In this context we always mean by Psensation
qualitiesp also the Pqualities of emotionsp (cf. $ 85).

x and an experience constituent b of y agree, either approximately or

77. Part Similari~

78. Recollection of Similarity as Basic Relation 77

The dimensions pof the sensation qualities of a sense modality, namely
quality solid,76(e.g., color solid, tone scale), intensity scale, and sensory
field (e.g., visual field, tactile field) are not recognizable on the basis of
the relation of part identityP (i.e., they are not constructable from
'part identityc). These orders rest upon Pproximity relationsp, and the
latter are not derived from Ppart identityp: Ptwo color sensations of
almost identical hues have, relative to part identity, the same relation
to one another as two entirely different color sensations, nay, even as
a color sensation and a tone sensationp. Thus, even if we had already
introduced 'part identityc as a basic relation, we would still have either
to introduce pthe approximate agreement of two elementary experiences
relative to some characteristic of two constituentsp, itself as a basic relation, or else we would have to introduce another basic relation, from
which this relation is derivable. We call this relation Ppart sirnilarityp,
and, for the purposes of its logistic manipulation, we assign to its extension the symbol Ps. PTwo elementary experiences x and y are called "part
similar" if and only if an experience constituent (e.g., a sensation) a of

We could use cpart similarityC as basic relation, but, instead, we shall
rather take one of its constituent relations is from which it is easily derivable. This constituent relation is also epistemically more fundamental.
PIf it is recognized that two elementary experiences x and y are part similar, then a memory image of the earlier of the two, of say, x, must have
been compared with p. This Pprocess of recollectionp is not symmetrical;
the occurrence of x is different from that of y. Thus, the Presult of this
cognitionp is more precisely represented through an asymmetrical relation than through the symmetrical relation extension of 'part similarityc.
We shall introduce this asymmetrical relation as basic relation; we call it
erecollection of similarityc and assign it the symbol Rs. "x Rs y" or "'recollectioll of similarity holds between x and yc" means: "px and y are elementary experiences which are recognized as part similar through the
comparison of a memory image of x with yp". We can express this more
briefly as " g h e elementary experiences x and y are connected through
recollection of similarityp". (By " ~ e ~ o l l e c t i o nwe
~ ~ "do not here mean
only the Preproduction of an already faded experiencep, but also the

75

das Gebiet der Gefiihle
Qualitatskorper

completely, in their characteristics (quality in the narrower sense, intensity, location sign)P.
By the expression "Psimilarityp", in contrast to "ppart similarityp", we
here mean the corresponding relation between Pqualities of sensationsv
(even though this word has generally a wider meaning). To this relation,
we assign the logistic extension symbol Sim. We say, for example, that
ptWo color sensations a and b are similarp (a Sim b), Pif they agree a p
proximately or completely in hue, saturation, brightness, (or hue, white
content, black content) and location sign (i.e., place in the visual field);
two elementary experiences x and y in which similar color sensations a
and b occur are, then, part similarp (x Ps y). (For the relation between
Pqualities of sensationsp which corresponds to Ppart identityp, we do not
need a new term nor a special sign, since this relation is identity itself).
We want to take the relation extension Sim and thus also Ps as reflexive
so that 'every elementary experience is said to be part similar both to
itself and to those elementary experiences with which it is part identical,
and every sensation quality is similar to itself'.

" Gmndbeziehung
78

Teilrelation

128

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

Pretention of a just preceding experience, for example, a perception,
which has not yet vanished but still has vivid aftereffectsp.)
From the indicated meanings of Ppart similarity and recollection of
similarityp, the following 'derivation of part similarity from recollection
of similarity' results: 'two elementary experiences x and y are called part
similar (Ps) if the relation of recollection of similarity (Rs) holds either
between x and y or between y and xC. ("Derivation" means construction
without strict form. The construction of 'part similarityc within the constructional system, which corresponds to this derivation, is carried out
in ยง 110.)
Thus, while Ps can be derived from Rs, the opposite is not possible.
If the difference in direction is once blotted out through a symmetrical
relation, then it cannot be reintroduced by constructional methods. The
difference in direction is important for the construction of time order;
we shall later on derive time order from Rs without having to introduce
a new basic relation. This is the main reason why we chose Rs and not
Ps as basic relation.

79. The Possibility of Further Derivations
(In the following, we shaU use the p- and c-symbols for psychological
and constructional language only in special cases.)
In order to determine whether we have to introduce any basic relations other than recollection of similarity, we have to investigate the
possibilities of further derivations from Rs and Ps. As we have mentioned earlier, it is not possible to derive part similarity (Ps) from part
identity (Pi). However, the opposite derivation of Pi from Ps is possible,
so that Pi does not have to be introduced as a basic relation.
For the derivation of Pi from Ps, the following simple method seems
to present itself. We shall see that it is not successful. Two sensation
qualities, a, b, are identical if and only if a is similar (Sim) to the same
sensation qualities as is b. Sim and identity are relations which hold between sensation qualities; between elementary experiences, we have the
corresponding relations Ps and Pi, respectively. Thus, one could think
that part identity Pi should be defined in such a way that it holds between
two elementary experiences x and y if and only if x stands in the relation
Ps to the same elementary experiences as y. However, this definition
would be inappropriate. For, it should after all hold, for example, that
x Pi y, if in the elementary experiences x and y the same hue is found at
the same place of the visual field. However, in this case, the indicated

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

129

definition will fail most of the time. If, for example, x has another hue a
at a different place of the visual field and y does not have a hue which is
similar to a, then x is part similar to all elementary experiences in which
a similar hue is in the place of a ; but this does not hold for y. Thus, our
tentatively formulated definition is here not fulfilled.
This attempted derivation shows the following: given a relation between elementary experiences which depends (as Pi and Ps) upon
certain constituents of elementary experiences; if we want to ascertain
whether such a relation holds, we shall have to consider upon which
constituent it depends that the relation holds in a particular case. It is
very easy to make mistakes in the various constructions of the lower
levels if no proper attention is paid to this point. In this connection, it
must also be noted that Pi is not transitive, as is usually the case with
relations of identity or agreement (ยง 11). The agreement of two elementary experiences in a definite constituent is indeed transitive, but not
Pi as agreement in any constituent (cf. the nontransitivity of color kinship in the example of ยง 70).
The desired derivation of Pi from Ps cannot be camed out immediately. Rather, with the aid of the procedure of quasi analysis, we must
derive from Ps first the "similarity circles" and then the "quality classes".
From these we can then easily obtain Pi.

80. Similarity Circles
Let us apply to Ps the procedure of quasi analysis of the second type,
which we discussed earlier ( ยง 72), i.e., quasi analysis on the basis of a
part similarity relation (extension). We thereby determine the similarity
circles based on Ps; from now on, let us call these simply similarity
circles without any qualifying phrase, since similarity circles based on
other relations will occur only rarely. Thus, by "'similarity circlesc", we
understand those classes of elementary experiences which have the following two properties: any two elementary experiences of such a class
are part similar to one another (Ps); if an elementary experience is part
similar to all elementary experiences of such a class, then it belongs itself
to that class. (The construction of similarity circles within the construction system is carried out according to this definition in ยง 111.) The
second step of quasi analysis based on Ps will determine quasi constituents which we shall call quality clmses ( 3 81).
In order to understand the significance of the derived 'similarity circles and quality classesc relative to the Pconstituents of experiencesp, let
U introduce a spatial symbolization of elementary experiences and their

130

1

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

constituents, which we shall initially take to be sense impressions. Let us
represent the sensation qualities through points; proximity of two points
in space is to represent the relation of similarity (Sim) between the
qualities in question. Thus, we obtain a connected spatial array as a
spatial representation for each sense modality. The tone sensations form
a two-dimensional array, since we differentiate pitch and loudness in
them. Visual sensations do not form a three-dimensional array; this
would merely correspond to the customary color solid, where the three
dimensions, hue, saturation, and brightness, or hue, white content, and
black content, are represented; rather, they form a five-dimensional array,
since the location signs-which themselves form a two-dimensional manifold-also count as characteristics. Since a five-dimensional order is
unintuitive, let us imagine a two-dimensional order, which depends upon
the relations of the location signs (i.e., upon the order of the visual field);
and let us furthermore imagine a set of three-dimensional color solids, one
of which corresponds to each place of that two-dimensional order. Every
point of the above-mentioned order represents a sensation quality (in the
widest sense, cf. ยง $ 76, 85); we correlate to it those elementary experiences in which the sensation quality in question occurs. Since, in an
elementary experience, several qualities occur at the same time, every
elementary experience is correlated to various quality points, within
different sense modalities as well as within the same sense modality.
Let us now consider a sense modality whose spatial representation is
to have the dimension number n. Within this sense modality, we find
n-dimensional spheres, whose diameters correspond to the largest distance that allows two sensation qualities to be still similar (Sim) at
that place of the sense modality. Through comparison with the example
of Q 72, whose "color spheres" correspond to these n-dimensional quality spheres, we recognize easily that a similarity circle is the class of
those elementary experiences which are assigned to the points of such
an n-dimensional quality sphere. These similarity circles do not exclude
one another, but frequently show a partial overlap. Here, we have to
distinguish two different types of overlap, which we could perhaps describe as "essential" and "accidental". If two similarity circles correspond to two partially overlapping quality spheres, which then of course
belong to the same sense modality, then the similarity circles show a
corresponding overlap; this we call essential overlap. On the other hand,
if two similarity circles correspond to mutually exclusive quality spheres,
then they can nevertheless have elementary experiences in common,
since each elementary experience corresponds to various quality points.

1

131

This "accidental" overlap can even occur between similarity circles of
m e r e n t sense modalities.

8 1. The Quality Classes
We can also envisage the just-mentioned overlapping of similarity circles
as mutual dissections. Since the quality points are the largest parts which
remain undivided in the mutual overlapping of quality spheres, the
classes of elementary experiences which correspond to these points are
the largest subclasses of the similarity circles, which remain always undivided through essential overlappings. Now each such class of elementary experiences which correspond to one point can be isolated through
such dissections of 0verlapping.~9 For, for any two different quality
points, one can always find a third one such that it is similar (Sim) to
one but not to the other (i.e., one can thus always find a similarity circle
which includes the elementary experiences of the one, but not of the
other).
In addition, we have to consider the dissection through accidental
overlapping of similarity circles. To gauge their effect, let us consider
a concrete example.
EXAMPLE. Let the classes a, b, be two similarity circles of the visual
sense. Let us restrict ourselves only to two individual places of the visual
field in order that we should not have to cope with a fivedimensional
array, but only with three-dimensional arrays. The three-dimensional
color solids which correspond to each of these visual field places we
envisage, for simplicity's sake, not as continuous, but as discrete (i.e., as
being composed of a finite number of discrete points). Let us refer to the
color solids which correspond to the two visual field places as the first
and the second color solid. Let the similarity circle a include all those
elementary experiences which correspond to five definite points of the
first color solid; these five points are then in proximity to one another in
the color solid; assume that they lie within the range of the blue hues. In
like fashion, let b be a similarity circle of five red hues of the second
color solid. If, in an elementary experience, one of those blue hues is
found in the first visual field place, then it will not ordinarily be the case
that one of those red hues will be found at the second visual field place.
Nevertheless, this can happen in certain cases, which, however, will form
only a small fraction of all those cases in which the blue or else the red
hues occur at their visual field place. This means that there may be some
elementary experiences which belong to the similarity circle a as well as
78

Oberdeckungszerschneidungen

132

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

b; let us assume that they are the elementary experiences x, y, z. We are
here concerned with an accidental overlap between a and b; it cannot be
an essential overlap in this case, since a and b belong to different color
solids and furthermore to different color ranges within the color solids.
x corresponds to one of the five quality points of a; let us call the class of
elementary experiences which correspond to this point q. Let y correspond to the same and z to a different point of a; thus, x and y are
elements of q, but z is not. The class q represents a sensation quality of
the visual sense, namely, a certain blue hue at a certain visual field place,
for this sensation quality is a common property of the elements of q.
Classes of this kind we call quality classes. Now, the quality class q of the
similarity circle a is dissected by the similarity circle b, since only x and
y and no other elements of q belong to b. The part of q which is cut off
through the accidental overlapping of a and b is here only very small
relative to q itself.

We have seen previously that quality classes (i.e., the classes of elementary experiences which are assigned to a given quality point) are not
divided by an essential overlapping of similarity circles. We have now
shown that they may be divided through an accidental overlapping. However, in this case, the part which is split off is generally (i.e., if special
conditions do not obtain; see below) very small relative to the quality
class as a whole and especially relative to the similarity circle. We can
easily see this in the above example, and this result can be generalized
without difficulty. Here then lies the difference between accidental and
essential overlap, for, in the latter case, any piece of a similarity circle
that is split off includes at least an entire quality class (i.e., a not inconsiderable fraction of the similarity circle or of one of its parts).
Since quality classes can be determined with the aid of essential overlapping of similarity circles and since these overlappings can be distinguished from accidental overlappings by the indicated characteristic, we
now can provide a definition of quality classes. It contains two conditions; the first corresponds to the fact that quality classes are not divided
by essential overlappings of similarity circles (i.e., overlappings which
cut off more than only very small parts); the second condition is that
quality classes should be the largest possible classes with the indicated
property. (If the definition did not contain the second condition, then
every subclass of a quality class would fulfill the definition.) The definiclasS
tion reads: a class c of elementary experience is called a
if c is totally contained in any similarity circle which contains a considerable part of c and if for every elementary experience x which does not

TIIE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCITONAL SYSTEM 1 133

belong to c there exists (at least) one similarity circle which contains c
but to which x does not belong. (Construction of quality classes in the
constructional system, ยง 112.)
We have previously seen that the 'quality classesc are constructional
representations of Psensation qualitiesp (in the widest sense, including
the emotion qualities, etc.). Thus, we shall sometimes call them, in brief,
"qualities".
In constructing similarity circles and quality classes, we must pay
especial attention to the fact that the construction does not have to reflect
the actual process of cognition, but that it is only a rational reconstruction which must lead to the same result.
We have mentioned here and earlier ( 8 72) that the application of the
method of quasi analysis leads to the desired result only if special "unfavorable conditions" do not obtain. These unfavorable conditions could
consist, for example, in the fact that certain QqualitiesQalways or frequently occur together with certain others. This would lead to irregularities in the derivation of
classesCand later on in the division
into Csensory classesc and in the CSim-orderc within the sensory classes.
However, a more detailed investigation, which we have to omit for lack
of space, shows that these interferences in the concept formation through
quasi analysis can occur only if circumstances are present under which
the real process of cognition, namely, the intuitive quasi analysis which
is carried out in real life, would also not lead to normal results.

82. Does One Basic Relation Sufice?
We have seen earlier that the assignment of two elementary experiences
to the same quality point-in other words, their membership in the same
quality class-means that they have an identical constituent (i.e., that
they are part identical [ยง 761). Thus, we can easily derive part identity
(Pi) from quality classes: two elementary experiences are called part
identical (Pi) if there is a quality class to which both of them belong.
(For the construction of Pi, see Q 113.) If we had introduced Pi as a
basic relation, then we would derive the quality classes through quasi
analysis from Pi. Here we actually proceeded in the opposite direction.
Since we have just derived the quality classes from the similarity circles,
which in turn were derived from part similarity (Ps), the desired derivation of Pi from Ps has been accomplished. Thus, the relation Pi, which
is important for further derivations, does not have to be introduced as
a basic relation.

134

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O P THE WORLD

So far, we have derived two relations between elementary experiences,
namely, Pi and Ps, from the basic relation Rs. Furthermore, two kinds
of classes of elementary experiences, namely, the similarity circles and
the quality classes, have been derived. The latter are especially important
since they represent the first constituents of elementary experiences,
namely, the qualities of sensory perceptions and emotions (and perhaps
even of other kinds, if there are such; cf. 8 85). Now we must derive
a further division of these qualities into the various domains, for example, of sensation qualities and sense modalities. Furthermore, for the
individual sense modalities we have to derive a separation of the qualitative order (in the narrow sense) from the order of the sensory field,
upon which the spatial order rests. Then we shall have to derive this
spatial order itself and a temporal order. With the aid of the qualitative,
the spatial, and the temporal order, the world of physical objects is then
to be constructed, and finally the further object domains, especially the
heteropsychological and the cultural.
The derivations themselves are discussed in the following, the third
chapter of this part, and are then given in Part IV in the outline of our
constructional system. As far as the problem of basic relations is concerned, we must here anticipate a result of later discussions, namely, that,
even for the further derivations, no new basic relation seems to be required. Our primary objective is the treatment of the logical, not the
content problems of the constructional system; thus, the exposition of
the constructional system which is given in the sequel is only an outline, whose main purpose is to show the practical applications of the
various formal principles and of the entire constructional method in an
example. It is for this reason that we cannot make a definite assertion,
but only a conjecture, to the effect that recollection of similarity (Rs)
suffices as basic relation for a constructional system with autopsychological basis. In any event, the investigations show that a very small number of basic relations suffices and that we require as basic relations only
relation extensions of elementary experiences and no relation extensions
on higher levels. (Cf. the theses in Q 156.)

83. The Basic Relations as Categories ( M a y be omitted)
By categories are meant the forms of synthesis of the manifold of intuition so to the unity of the object. Now neither this explanation (which is
not a definition) nor the various traditional tables of categories make it
Anschauung

M E FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

I

135

sufliciently clear what is meant by "categories". Since the concepts in
our constructional system are clearer than those of the traditional systems, we ask what is there in the constructional system as a system of
the synthesis of objects which corresponds to the categories? In construction theory, the manifold of intuition is called "the given", "the basic
elements". The synthesis of this manifold to the unity of an object is here
called the construction of this object from the given. Thus, the forms of
this synthesis would be the constructional forms, of which we have distinguished several (Q 26). One could perhaps mean by "category" our
ascension forms. Then we could say that, in our constructional system,
we have only two categories, namely, class and relation. But perhaps we
are in better agreement with established usage (which is not very clear)
if we call the basic relations categories. The following fact would seem
to support this: in a certain sense, every statement about any object is,
materialiter, a statement about the basic elements. But, formaliter, it is
a statement about the basic relations. Also, the agreement is easy to see
when we consider a constructional system where the analysis has not
been carried as far as in the present attempt and where, therefore, a
larger number of basic relations is introduced.
In an earlier draft of the constructional system, the following five relations were proved to be sufficient basic relations (if we can speak of a
proof in the sketchy exposition of that system): (central) part identity
(somewhat narrower than Pi in the present system, ยง 76), (central) part
similarity (somewhat narrower than Ps in the present system, cf. 5 77),
the serial relation of intensity scales (here constructed only after the
visual things, 5 13I ) , the recollection relation (somewhat more general
than the basic relation Rs in the present system, ยง 78), proximity in the
sensory field (more general than Proxpl for visual field places in the
present system, 3 89). It must be noted that the recollection relation
leads immediately to the construction of a (preliminary) time order (in
a similar way, Er leads to Er,,, 8 87), and proximity in the sensory field
leads to the construction of a spatial order, namely, at first to the order
within the sensory field which must already be called "spatial", later on
to the proper spatial order of the physical world (like Proxpl in the
present system, 189).
One can see a certain similarity between the indicated five basic rela.
tions of the earlier draft and the categories which occur in some category
systems, namely, identity, similarity, intensity, time, and space. Thus,
we can envisage the problem of the basic relations in construction theory
as the problem of categories.

138

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OP THE WORLD

We have advanced the conjecture ( 8 82) that Rs suffices as a basic
relation. It is, namely, the case that the five basic relations of the earlier
draft can be, in part, derived from one another. Indeed, it appears that
they can all be derived from a single one. As a statement about categories, this would have to be expressed in the following way: the five
above-mentioned categorial forms are not the actual (fundamental)
categories, but they are in part reducible to one another; the number
of (genuine) categories is very small; perhaps there is only a single
category.

THE OBJECT FORMS

84. Derivations as Preparation for Construction
Of the four main problems of construction theory ( $ 26), only the last
one, namely, that of the object forms, remains to be treated. This problem, more than any of the others, is predominantly concerned with the
material content of the constructional system. Since we are here mainly
concerned with the clarification of the logico-methodological aspect of
construction theory, we will not be able to find a ready solution for it
at this time. To begin with, we shall investigate, for the most important
objects of the lower constructional levels, how they are determined by
the basic relation and the already derived objects and thus how they
can be constructed from these. The constructions themselves of these
and other objects will then be given in the next section, in the outline
of the constructional system. Thus the derivations which we are about
to give here are in preparation for the constructions themselves. These
derivations concentrate mostly upon the material aspect of the problem,
while the later constructions will have to show how these material relationships are to be fitted into the logical forms which are to be used in
the formulation of the constructional system. Since we are concerned
merely with an outline, this process of fitting the material into the logical

138

/

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

forms amounts to no more than an application, by way of example, of
the methodological forms to those material relationships of the objects
themselves. It is the methodological forms with which we are mostly
concerned; we assert their validity and utility. On the other hand, the
content which we use for our examples is not asserted to be conclusively
established. Should the empirical sciences (for the lower constructional
levels, this means especially the phenomenology of perception and psychology) come to the conclusion that the relations of objects are different from what we are here supposing, then these d8erent relations must
be expressed according to the same methodological principles in appropriate constructional forms. This means that we are here formulating
basic relation(s) and object forms only with reservations. On the other
hand, the formulation of the basic elements and especially of the system
form and the ascension forms belongs to the thesis of our construction
theory (cf. the theses in ยง 156).
Thus the following investigations serve, on the one hand, as a preparation for the following part, for the outline of the constructional system.
On the other hand, they should contribute to the support of the conjecture advanced in the preceding section, namely, that a single basic relation suffices for the construction of all objects.

85. The Sense Classes
After the quality classes have been derived ( $ 81), a relation of similarity (Sim) between them can be defined in a simple way. Two qualities are similar if, and only if, every elementary experience in which the
first occurs is part similar to every elementary experience in which the
second occurs. Thus, we define: two quality classes a and b are called
similar ( a Sim b ) if every element of a is part similar (Ps) to every element of b (construction of Sim in the constructional system: 3 114).
With the aid of the relation Sim, we can now proceed with a division
into sense modalities. This division must be based upon qualities and
not on elementary experiences, since any of the latter may belong to
several sense modalities at the same time. Two qualities belong to the
same sense modality, if and only if, there is a sequence of qualities b e
tween the two such that each quality in the sequence is similar to the
next quality in the sequence. (For example, between any two tones, we
can form such a chain of Sim pairs, but not between a tone and a
fragrance.)
If we call a class which is formed by the qualities of one and the same

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 139

sense modality a sense class, then the sense classes are formed through
quasi analysis on the basis of the relation of connectibility through such
Sim-chains (construction of sense classes: 8 115).
We shall find as 'sense classescnot only the classes of visual qualities,
auditory qualities, thermal qualities, etc., but also the emotions; this is
due to the meaning of the basic relation Rs and to the reasons advanced
in $ 76. If psychology were ever to demonstrate the existence of psychological entities other than sensations and emotions, entities which could
not be reduced to either sensations or emotions, such as, for example,
thoughts, volitions, or whatever, then the basic relation would also refer
to the similarities between these entities; their pqualitiesp would be constructed as 'quality classesc, and their domain or domains would be constructed as sense classes. Thus, no kind of psychological process lies
outside the framework of constructable entities.

86. The Characterization of the Visual Sense
After the division of the qualities into sense classes has been derived, we
can investigate the order of the qualities within each of these sense
classes. Indeed, we can envisage Sim as the proximity relation which
determines this order. If a proximity relation exists for a given domain,
then the dimension number (Dn) of the domain is thereby determined
(at the moment, we shall not concern ourselves with the definition).
Thus every sense class has a certain Dn relative to Sim. We have mentioned above that the sense class of tone sensations has Dn 2, that of the
visual sense, of color sensations, Dn 5 ( $ 80). For the senses of the
skin, the location signs are orderable in two dimensions. Since their qualities are furthermore differentiable through intensity and perhaps also
through a quality series, the Dn of each of them (tactile sense, sense of
warmth, sense of cold, sense of pain) is 3 or 4. The Dn of the other
senses, incIuding the domain of the emotions, is for some of them 2,
for others 3.
The most important factor in this c o ~ e c t i o nis that the quality order
of the visual sense has a Dn which is different from that of all other
senses. Thus it is possible to characterize, construct, give a definite description of, this sense, which is more important for the construction of
physical objects than any of the others. The constructional definition
reads simply: that sense class, for which the order of qualities relative
b Si has the Dn 5, is called the visual sense (construction: 8 115).
It may seem paradoxical at fust sight that we here give a "definition"

140

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

of the visual sense, indeed, a definition on the basis of such an inessential
property as the Dn, which does not have the slightest connection with
the special phenomenal peculiarity of the visual sense and its difference
from all other sensations. Such an objection, whether it is stated or
whether it is merely a subconscious sentiment, rests upon a confusion
of the aim of a constructional definition with that of a conceptual definition in the ordinary sense. We have mentioned earlier (ยง $ 50, 5 1) that
we require of a constructional definition a regard only for logical, not for
epistemic, value. For, a translation which is carried out with the aid of
a constructional definition as translation rule has to guarantee nothing
but the invariance of the truth value of the statements, and not also the
invariance of the sense. If we assume that the psychological statement
which we have used for our definition, namely, that the Dn of the similarity order for the visual sense, but for no other sense, is 5, then it is
quite obvious in the present case that every statement about the visual
sense remains true or false if, for the words "visual sense", we substitute
"the sense whose similarity order has the Dn 5".

87. The Temporal Order
In our perception of physical things, we recognize not only properties
in their qualitative and intensive differences, but also spatial and temporal relations. Let us first concern ourselves with the temporal relations.
It is easy to see that the temporal determinations of the physical world
go back to the recognition of the temporal relation between elementary
experiences. The question now arises whether the temporal relation
between elementary experiences must be introduced as a basic relation.
It turns out, however, that it can be derived from recollection of similarity (Rs). After all, Rs includes a temporal relation: from x Rs y, one
can conclude that x is temporally earlier than y. However, we cannot in
this way decide for every pair of elementary experiences which of them
is temporally earlier; we can make this decision only for part similar
elementary experiences. But, because of the transitivity of the time relation, we can infer from such pairs the temporal order of many othe;
pairs. For the construction of the temporal sequence, the recognition
of the temporal relation of temporally near elementary experiences is
especially important, and such temporally near elementary experiences
are in many, perhaps in most, cases, part similar. For, if any sensation
quality remains constant or varies continuously during a certain time
interval, all temporally near elementary experiences in this time span
are part similar to one another.

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 141

From the basic relation Rs, we cannot construct an uninterrupted
temporal sequence. Nevertheless, we can construct a preliminary temporal order (about its construction, cf. Q 120), which we shall have to
supplement with the aid of the regularity of physical processes which
cannot be done until after the construction of physical objects. Not
only here, but also in the actual process of cognition, the time ordering
of experiences which is based upon "time perception" is incomplete and
becomes a completely ordered sequence only through inferences on the
basis of known psychological and especially physical regularities.

88. Derivation of Visual Field Places
We have seen that the visual sense can be differentiated from the other
senses without any new basic concept, solely through the dimension
number 5 of the similarity order of its qualities. Although we have constructionally introduced this five-dimensional order, we did not thereby
introduce the three-dimensional order of the color solid, nor the twodimensional order of the visual field. The derivations which we have
made so far do not enable us to differentiate the various dimensions.
If, for example, two qualities, a, b, of the visual sense are similar
(Sim) to one another in color type (i.e., in hue, saturation, and brightness) and if they also belong to two proximate visual field places, briefly,
places, and if two other qualities c, d, are similar to one another by belonging to the same place and by agreeing approximately in color type,
then both pairs are called, without distinction, "Sim-pairs", and cannot
be distinguished on the basis of their behavior relative to Sim. We call
two qualities (without reference to their color types) place identical if
they agree in their location sign (i.e., if they belong to the same place);
correspondingly, we call two qualities color identical (without reference
to their place) if they agree in color type. Our task is now to derive one
of these two relations, either place identity or color identity, from relations that have already been derived. The other one will easily result in
either case from the first.
The derivation of place identity (Plid) is indeed possible. It rests
mainly upon the circumstance that (different) place-identical qualities
cannot appear simultaneously in the same elementary experience. This
fact can be expressed through the already available derivations. For, in
the language of construction theory, it corresponds to the fact that certain pairs of quality classes have no elementary experience as a common
element, hence, that they are mutually exclusive quality classes (relation Excl). But Excl is only a necessary, not a sficient, condition for

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

Plid. There may be pairs of visual qualities which belong to different
places and which never happen to occur together in one experience. Thus
we cannot simply define Plid through Excl. On the other hand, we can
be sure that all Plid-pairs are faund among the Excl-pairs. Thus, the task
consists in sorting those unknown pairs out of the known pairs, but this
is not immediately possible. However, the following method accomplishes our aim. If Plid had already been derived, we could define the
(visual field) places as abstraction classes (ยง 73) of Plid (i.e., as the
largest possible classes of place identical qualities). If we form instead
(through quasi analysis according to $ 71) the similarity circlesa1 of
Excl, then the desired place classes are either identical with them or
subclasses of them.
It might seem as though this would not help us at all, as though we
had only exchanged the earlier difficulty of sorting out the correct Plidpairs from the Excl pairs for the new difficulty of sorting out the desired
place-classes from the similarity circles 8l of Excl. In reality, however,
the conditions are here quite different. In the earlier case, we had no
reason to suppose that the Excl-pairs were, for the most part, also Plidpairs. On the other hand, the probability that those similarity circles 81
are very much more comprehensive than the place classes which are
contained in them is considerably smaller for the following reason: in
order to make an erroneous assignment through quasi analysis of an
element to a place class, it does not sufficethat this element should have
the relation Excl to one or more elements of the place, but it would
have to have this relation to aU elements of the place; this follows from
the definition of similarity circles.81 Looked at from another point of
view: there are two necessary conditions for an erroneous assignment of
an element to a given place class, namely, first, that the visual field place
in question should be unoccupied in at least one elementary experience
and, secondly, that the element to be assigned, which actually belongs to
a different place, should occur only in such experiences as leave that
other place unoccupied. For, in all other cases, the relation Excl would
not obtain.
Through a more detailed investigation, one can show the following:
if unoccupied places do not occur too frequently, then the number of
Excl-pairs may still be considerably larger than the number of Plid-pairs;
nevertheless, the probability that the similarity circles of Excl surpass
the place classes considerably is relatively very small. Incidentally, one
The first German edition reads "Abstraktionsklassen" at the indicated places.
The change is due to Prof. Carnap; it follows Prof. Goodman's observation that,
since Excl. (Fre) is a nontransitive relation, there can be no abstraction class of Excl.

1

143

can see at once whether a similarity circle is a proper place class by
noticing that none of its elements belongs to another similarity circle.81
Elements whose membership is doubtful betray themselves through repeated occurrence; one ought to make them the subject of a special
investigation after the preliminary place classes have been constructed
and have been brought into a proximity order. We cannot concern ourselves here with the relatively difficult procedure of this investigation (the
determination of the similarity relations between certain quality classes of
proximate places), but, through it, we could construct the definitive place
classes. For our purposes, it is satisfactory to have shown the possibility
of dividing the visual qualities into place classes through a simple procedure, even though this division holds only approximately (i.e., with the
possible exception of individual visual qualities which cannot be assigned
a place with this simple procedure [construction of place classes, 1171).

89. The Spatial Order of the Visual Field
From the just-derived place classes, Plid is derivable, namely, as membership in the same place class (construction: 3 117).
The introduction of place classes, which represent the visual field
places, does not in itself lead to the spatial ordering of the visual field;
this results only from the relations between the places, which, however,
can now easily be derived.
Two places are called proximate places (Proxpl), if a quality of one
of them is similar to a quality of the other (construction 8 117). (We
do not say "all qualities" since it is not impossible that at a given place
qualities of certain color types do not occur.) Proxpl is the fundamental
relation for the spatial order of the visual field. Thus, for example, the
statement that the visual field is two dimensional is a statement about
a certain formal property of Proxpl. (Thus, it does not mean that the
visual field is like a surface in the phenomenal sense.)
REFERENCES. The literature does not seem to contain any attempts
at the construction of the initial spatial order, that is, of the twodimensional order of the visual field. The two systems which otherwise
give the most detailed description of the individual constructions, namely,
Ziehen [Erkth.] and Driesch [Ordnungsl.]skip over this construction even
though it already requires a very considerable number of steps (even if

'"

See preceeding note.

144

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

one does not take only one basic relation, but a special basic relation for
spatial ordering; they also omit the construction of threedimensional
space from the two-dimensional visual field order, which has repeatedly
been discussed by others (cf. the references in 1 124).

90. The Ordering of Colors
For the ordering of colors, which we frequently represent graphically in
the form of the color solid, we do not need any further basic relation.
The color order can be derived from the place classes and the proximity
relation (Proxpl). For any two different colors, f, g, there is at least
one color which is similar to f, but not to g. From this it follows: if s,
i, u, are three neighboring places and if the quality a belongs to s, and
the quality b to t, and if a and b have a diierent color type (this word
comprises the dimensions of hue, saturation, and brightness), then it is
not the case that both of them are similar to the same qualities of u.
On the other hand, if a and b are both similar to the same qualities of u,
then a and b must have the same color type, and vice versa: if they have
the same color type, then the similar qualities in u must also be of that
color type. Thus, this behavior of a and b can be used for a definition
of "color identity in proximate places". From this we can derive the
relation of color identity for arbitrary places (Colid) : it holds between
qualities a and b if, between a and b, there exists a chain of qualities such
that each has to the next the relation of "color identity in proximate
places" (construction: Q 118).
The colors (in the sense of color types) result now simply as abstraction classes of Colid (construction: 3 118).
In analogy to the relation of proximate places, we define here as proximate colors (Proxcol) two colors f and g if they are of such a kind that
a quality of f is similar to a quality of g. (Generally speaking to each
quality of f, there will be at least one similar quality in g, and vice versa,
namely, a quality that occurs in the same or in a proximate place; however, for reasons similar to those given in connection with Proxpl we
do not want to found our definition upon this fact.) The ordering of
colors which depends upon Proxcol, we call color solid. The threedimensionality of the color solid can be expressed analogously to the twodimensionality of the visual field as a formal property of Proxcol (construction: $ 118).

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 145

91. Objections to the Given Derivation of the Visual Field Order
a n d the Color Order
Through the indicated derivations, we have divided the five-dimensional
similarity order (i.e., the order based on similarity [Sim]) of the visual
qualities into the two-dimensional order of the (visual field) places and
the three-dimensional order of the colors. This division was possible
because of the fact that the two relations of place identity and color
identity are formally different from one another in that various coloridentical qualities can occur in the same elementary experience, but not
different place-identical qualities. One could object to this that the diiference between the relation of two different colors in the same place
and the relation of two identical colors in difierent places is not a merely
formal difference, but a difference in quality or essence. I t could be
argued that, if only one basic relation is introduced, one cannot do justice to this essential difference, and that it is thus necessary to use
several basic relations, among which there would have to be represented
a qualitative and a location relation. It is indeed the case that the question
as to the number of necessary basic relations has not yet been conclusively resolved. But, even if we were to introduce further basic relations,
the difierence between place identity and color identity does not belong
to the given, but would have to be derived, for it is not a Merence between pairs of elementary experiences themselves, but between pairs of
qualities; the qualities would still have to be derived (namely through
quasi analysis), and the same would hold a fortiori for that difierence.
Admittedly, the difference would, in this case, go back to different relations between elementary experiences which would be immediately given
as different. Suppose that the difference between the two orders, which
we have established through formal properties of the respective relations, is instead traced back to a qualitative difference between color
and location sign (for the "places" must depend upon "location signs" of
some sort). It must then be pointed out that, even in this case, these two
quality determinations, with whose intuitively comprehensible difference
we are here concerned, have the same status. But their role, for the
construction of knowledge,82is nevertheless altogether different. One of
the two determinations, the location sign, serves as the foundation of the
"principle of individuation". It determines a preliminary ordering of
places, upon which the spatial ordering ultimately rests. That this func-

146

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

tion can be fulfilled by only one of the determinations is due precisely
to that formal property of place identity through which we have separated it from color identity, namely, that nonidentical, place-identical
qualities cannot occur in the same experience. Thus the separation of
the two orders which we havc carried out rests upon a formal, but not
at all inessential, difference, namely, upon the difference in those properties on which the roles of the two determinations for the recognition
of reality are based, namely, the role of that which orders (location sign)
and of that which is being ordered (colors). We shall later on examine
further considerations which are connected with this difference and with
its role as a principle of individuation ( $ 158).

92. Other Possibilities for a Derivation of the Visual Field
The indicated method for the derivation of the order of the visual field
places is not the only one which is possible. It could be argued that only
one kind of construction could be the correct one, since only one of
them can properly reflect (more precisely: rationally reconstruct) the
process of cognition as it takes place in the normal individual under
normal circumstances. The reason for the multiplicity of possibilities
lies in the fact that the real process of cognition, which we shall call
intuitive in contrast to the rational reconstruction, is overd~termined.~~
Hence, the possibility and necessity of a plurality of determinations
each of which would be sufficient by itself.
In the above-stated method of derivation of the visual field ( ยง 89),
we have used only the similarity of the location sign of proximate visual
field places. It is possible that this factor, even though it is always present, is not fundamental as far as the psychology of cognition is concerned.
It could be that, fundamentally, the location signs are not comparable and
that they do not exhibit relations of similarity to one another. It could
be the case that certain pairs of location signs are marked as similar pairs
only through an association due to a change in color quality which
results upon a small motion of the eyes. It could also be the case that,
from the viewpoint of the psychology of cognition, we should think of
the origin of the relations between visual field places in a different way,
namely, as connected with the kinesthetic sensations of the eye muscles.
A different constructional derivation of the visual field order could be
based upon such an assumption.
Let us discuss a third possibility of the derivation of the visual field
iiberbesiimmt

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 147

order because it raises a point which is of general importance. This
derivation, compared to the previous ones, assumes a good deal less as
given. We could take as given only what occurs in the visual focus and
disregard all that is seen indirectly. However, in this case, we must
assume as possible that two (or more) color types which have a common boundary (or meet in a point) can be sensed simultaneously in
the visual focus, whi!e we have previously claimed that to one place of
the visual field there corresponds always only one color type. The colors
which occur in this case form, to begin with, a one-dimensional order
which is due to their temporal relations. We can easily arrive at higher
orders, at a sort of visual field, by utilizing, in addition, the kinesthetic
sensations of the eye movements. However, it is possible, even in this
case, to do without the kinesthetic sensations, even though this makes
the construction considerably more difficult. While we would then not
have a visual field, the construction would lead to a two-dimensional
order, just as in the derivations which we have discussed earlier. (We
can easily convince ourselves of this fact if we think of the series of
visual point sensations which we have when the eye is moved but the
surroundings are unchanged.)
It is remarkable that in all cases (even though in different ways) there
results at first a two-dimensional order, from which only later a threedimensional order is constructed, namely, the order which we take to be
the spatial order of physical reality. Once physical reality is fully constructed, we can go backward, interpreting the various two-dimensional
orders and "explaining" their two-dimensionality from a certain property
of physical reality which includes essentially certain physiological things
and processes. We can then explain, from the two-dimensional order of
the retinal organs, the fact that the visual field turns out to be two
dimensional in the first type of derivation (i.e., on the basis of the location
signs). For the construction with the aid of eye movements, the explanation goes back to the fact that the eye can be moved in two dimensions
relative to the head. Finally, we have shown the possibility of a construction of the two-dimensional order of the visual field on the basis
of visual point sensations, without any reference to sensations of eye
movement. We have done this predominantly for the following reason:
this third possibility, which leaves out of consideration the relations of
location signs, shows that the actual reason for the two-dimensionality of
the local order of the seen lies neither in the constitution of the retina
nor in the nature of the eye movement; rather, the reason for this (always
from the viewpoint of the completely constructed, three-dimensional,

148

1

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

physical world) lies in the fact that the light rays which fall upon one
point form a bundle of rays of second degree and are therefore ordered
two-dimensionally. On the other hand, the constitution of the visual
organ, as far as the arrangement of the nerve endings and its type of
mobility are concerned, can be considered of practical value in view of
this fact, since it facilitates the recognition of the two-dimensional order,
but it is not absolutely necessary for the construction of this order.

93. The "Sensations" as Individlial Constituents o f Experiences
Above, we have constructed quality classes as classes of elementary experiences which represent the constituents of elementary experiences as
quasi constituents. If two elementary experiences belong to the same
quality class, then we say that the two experiences agree in a certain constituent. If we wish to differentiate the two like constituents of the two
elementary experiences, then it does not suffice just to characterize them
as to quality, but we must, in addition, identify the elementary experience
to which they belong. Only a constituent which is so characterized is an
individual, strictly unique constituent in the proper sense. In contrast to a
constituent which is characterized only as to its quality (i.e., only as to
how it is represented in a quality class), we wish to call it a "sensation".
Actually, we choose this word only for the sake of brevity (according to
what has been said above [ ยง ยง 76, 851, it also refers to simple emotions).
Consequently, we would have to define a sensation as an ordered pair
consisting of an elementary experience and a quality class, to which the
experience belongs. (*The quality is a constituent of the experiencep;
'the experience is an element of the qualityc.)
Simultaneity of constituents of experience relates to sensations: two
sensations are called "simultaneous" if the elementary experiences (i.e.,
the referents of the pairs) are identical (construction of sensations and
simultaneity: 0 116).
REFERENCES. Sensations properly belong to the object domain of
psychology; qualities, on the other hand, belong to the domain of
phenomenology or the theory of objects s4; there they are called "objects
of sensation": Meinong [Gegenstandsth.] 512, [Stellung] 8 ff.

It must be noted that, in our constructional system, we do not construct the qualities from the sensations (perhaps as classes of sensations,
as certain positivistic theories would have it), but, vice versa, the sensa-

"Gegenstandstheorie

1

149

tions are constructed from the qualities. These qualities, of course, are
then constructed from elementary experiences (thus fulfilling a general
tenet of positivism). We mentioned, as one of our basic tenets, that the
individual constituents of an elementary experience do not stand out in
the individual experience, but are gained only through abstraction,
namely, by placing the experience into orders which comprise other
experiences also. It is a consequence of this that sensations are constructed from quality classes and not vice versa. An individual experience, taken by itself, is unanalyzable. Experiences, taken as a manifold,
can be compared and ordered, and only through their order result the
(quasi) constituents o f the individual experiences.

94. Prospect o f Further Derivations
We now have given derivations for the most important objects of the
lower levels (i.e., we have determined how they may be constructed);
thus we have determined their "object form". In doing so, we have used
the relation extension of recollection of similarity as the only basic relation. Let us take a brief look at the derivation of some further objects,
paying particular attention to whether new basic relations are required.
An especially important step in the constructional system is the construction of the three-dimensional spatial order, i.e., of visual space,
from the two-dimensional order, namely, the visual field. Here are
constructed, for the first time, things which belong to "reality" (in the
sense of "outside world"). In the actual process of cognition, tactile and
muscle sensations play an important role. However, the construction
can be carried out with the aid of visual sensations alone. It will turn
out that, for this construction, no new basic relation is required. We
shall give a brief indication of this derivation to show that it can be
carried out.
The visual sensations (as individual constituents of experiences) are
arranged in a one-dimensional sequence (time sequence) of threedimensional structures s5 (spaces) in a way that can be inferred from
the temporal sequence of spatially ordered visual fields (of the individual experiences), where it is assumed that what is seen retains its characteristics of color, shape, and position, except where changes are either
seen or inferred by analogy. We shall later on determine the construction of the spacetime world more precisely (0 0 125-127). The "visual
Gefiigc

150

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

things" result from certain characteristically coordinated "world lines"
of this four-dimensional structure ( 5 128).
It must be noted that, for the construction of visual things and of
three-dimensional space, we need neither the senses other than the
visual sense nor the components of the visual qualities (hue, saturation,
brightness), which, after all, have not yet been distinguished from one
another through the derivations which we have given so far. Although
this circumstance does not result in an economy in basic relations, it
makes possible a methodological simplification of construction.
In the actual process of cognition, the three-dimensional character of
things seems to be immediately given, at least in the case of persons
whose consciousness is fully developed. There are cases, however, where
the spatial order is the result of an ordering activity; this shows that the
construction is not a mere fiction, but a rational reconstruction of actual
processes. In the case of spatial ordering, this can of course be shown
only if special difficulties keep the synthesis in the actual process of cognition, which corresponds to the construction, from proceeding as quickly
and unconsciously as is usually the case. This is, for example, the case
in the orientation of blind persons (cf. the interesting remarks of Ahlmann [Opt. Vorst.]).
From the indicated constructions, we shall then proceed to further
constructions. Among the visual things, "my body" stands out through
certain characteristics ( ยง 129). With its aid, we can give individual definite descriptions of the most important other senses, having identified,
up to this point, only the visual sense ( 8 0 129, 131). Furthermore, the
various components of the qualities which are represented in the quality
classes can then be derived (e.g., quality in the narrower sense, intensity,
location sign). In this way, we shall finally construct all the psychological
entities of the autopsychological domain-in the derivations which have
been discussed or sketched so far, we have been concerned only with
this domain, and not with the heteropsychological domain. We shall also
be able to divide these autopsychological entities into main areas ("sense
classes") and discern their components ( ยง 131 f.). The construction of
the autopsychological domain does not require any further basic relations.
We have to construct, then, the "perceptual things" by an assignment
of the qualities of the other senses to the visual things (0 133 f.). We
shall construct the "world of physics" with the aid of the "world of
perception" ( 8 136). In such a way, we can construct the entire
domain of physical objects.
The possibility of the construction of the heteropsychological objects

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

I

lS1

these
follows from the earlier discussions concerning the reducibility
objects to physical objects ( $ 5 57, 58); the possibility of the construetion of cultural objects follow^ from the consideration concerning lheir
reducibility to psychological objects ($155, 5 6 ) . Later On, we
to the construction of the heteropsychological objects ( 3 140)
the construction of cultural objects (5 150 f - ) without*
indicating their precise object forms. Nevertheless, it will become
of these object types, no new basic
that, even for the
lions are required.

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF TAE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM 1 153

CHAPTER

FORMS OF REPRESENTATION FOR A
CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

95. The Four Languages
It is useful to give several parallel forms of representation or "languages"
for the constructional system, in order to facilitate its comp~ehensionand
examination. In representing the outline of our constructional system in
the next part, we shall use four languages, which are different from one
another, partly only in form, but partly also as concerns their sense. BY
difference in sense, we mean a difference in the ideas which different
persuasions may connect with the constructional formula of an object
which is otherwise neutral as far as sense is concerned. Thus, it is a
difference in sense (or epistemic value) where the logical value remains
the same ( ยง 50).
The basic language of the constructional system is the symbolic language of logistics. It alone gives the proper and precise expression for
the constructions; the other languages serve only as more comprehensible auxiliary languages. However, in the following outline we shall give
only the construction of the lower levels in this language. The reason for
this does not lie in the fact that the objects of higher type offer particular
difficulties of expression for this language, but in the fact that the problem
-

Vorstellungen

of constructing the higher objects has itself not been solved with precision and that these constructions therefore can be given only in bold outline. As soon as the content of the construction of any object is precisely
known, there are no difficulties in the way of a logistic formulation. This
basic language of logistics we shall discuss in somewhat more detail in
5 96, and we shall explain the most important symbols in 8 97.
The other three languages offer nothing but translations from this
basic language of logistics. To begin with, we shall give, after each constructional definition, a simple paraphrme in word language (cf. $ 98).
Then follows a translation into the realistic language customary in the
empirical sciences. Its main purpose is to facilitate testing the correctness
of the content of the construction (i.e., whether or not the constructional definition actually refers to the familiar object t3 which it purports
to refer ( Q98)). Finally, we have used a language o f fktitious constructive 0perations,8~in which the construction is envisaged as a rule
for a constructive operation. Its main purpose is to facilitate the intuitive
recognition of the formal correctness of the construction (i.e., the testing of whether each constructional definition is 0perative,8~that is, not
ambiguous, not empty, and purely extensional) (0 0 99, 101, 102).

REFERENCES. Gatschenberger [Symbola] gives an explicit discussion of the relation between different languages which deal with the same
state of affairs. His considerations can be used to facilitate the understanding of the multilingual technique which we are using here. The basic
language of our constructional system forms a sketch for a unified language such as is demanded by Gatschenberger; it also has the algorithmic
properties which Gatschenberger desires. However, we do not wish to
make the claim that this sketch solves the problem of the unified language; rather, the problem is clarified as through an example, and the
method for its solution is given.

96. The Symbolic Language of Logistics
The actual language of the constructional system is the symbolic language of logistics. The construction of the individual objects (of the
lower levels), as well as some statements ("theorems") as examples,
are given in "logistic formulation" ( ยง 46). There are two reasons for
the application of this symbolic language. To begin with, a constructed
object must clearly be distinguished from the corresponding object of
C___

Sprache einer fiktiven Konstruktion
konstruktiv

194

1 T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE W O R L D

daily life or of science. We have already shown the necessity for this
distinction in the preceding chapter and have occasionally tried to make
it obvious through special auxiliary symbols (p-symbols, c-symbols
[$ 751). The application of the symbolism, however, is more important
for the attainment of a second desideratum: we must demonstrate that
all objects are reducible to the basic objects (i.e., that all sentences
about further objects are transformable into sentences which contain
only logical signs and signs for the basic objects). It is obvious that the
value of a constructional system stands or falls with the purity of this
reduction, just as the value of an axiomatic exposition of a theory depends upon the purity of the derivations of theorems from axioms. We
can best insure the purity of this reduction through the application of
an appropriate symbolism. An application of the word language, without special symbolism, would guarantee this purity only if there were a
system of the concepts of logistics in the word language, especially of
tlie theory of relations, which is the most important part of logistics as
far as the constructional system is concerned. Such a word system is not
available, and one may doubt whether it will ever be developed, since
the advantages of the symbolic treatment are obvious to everyone who
is concerned with the theory of relations. The advantages are the same
that we find in mathematics when we use the symbolism rather than
expressing all mathematical equations and operations in a word language.
However, the system of constructions must not only be "pure" (i.e.,
free of unnoticed conceptual elements), but also formally accurate. Io
order for a constructional definition to fulfill its object-constructing function, it must be neither ambiguous nor empty, that is, it must not designate more than one, but it must also designate at least one, object (in
the most general sense, including the quasi objects, i.e., either an individual, or a class, or a relation extension). If we formulate the definition
in the word language, then this requirement is very difficult to fulfill (as
is the related desideratum of "operativeness" of the construction, 5 102,
which we shall introduce in connection with the language of constructive
operations). On the other hand, this requirement is easily and almost
automatically fulfilled when we apply an appropriate symbolism, for example, when we apply the logistic forms for the introduction of classes
or relation extensions and for definite descriptions of individuals. It is a
fact of logistics that these forms guarantee unequivocalness and logical
existence, for they have been created with these desired properties in
view.

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTW

1 1115

97. Explanation of Some Logistic Symbots
Knowledge of logistics is not a precondition for an understanding of construction theory nor for an understanding of the outline of a constructional system which is given below, since all logistical formulas which
are introduced at that place are translated into the word language. Nevertheless, let us here indicate the meaning of those logistical symbols which
will be used later, to the extent to which they have not already been
explained earlier.

REFERENCES.For a more detailed exposition of logistics, cf. Carnap
[Logistik]. For further references, cf. 8 3.
EXPLANATION
OF LOGISTIC SYMBOLS

Constants: classes with lower case, relations with capital, initial letter.
Variables: classes: a, P, . . . ; relations: P, Q, R, . . . ; in general: x, y, z.
Statements:
: negation; > : implication; one or several dots: conjunction (also substitute for parentheses); = (or I ) : identity; =di: definition symbol.
Propositional functions ( $ 28) : if fx is a propositional function, then
( x ) fx means: "Er holds for every x"; (3 x) fx means: "there is an x
for which fx holds."
Classes ($ 33): a f l p: intersection; a U P; union; a C P: subsumption; a - p: remainder. a Ex p: "a and /3 have no element in common."
3 ! a: "a is not empty"; [ x ] or ix: the class whose only element is x. If p is
a class of classes, then s'p is the union of the p-classes. Every class a has a
cardinal number Nc'a ( $ 4 0 ) . The customary symbols are used for
numbers, e.g., >, / (fraction sign).
Relations (3 34, 11) : Let Q, R be relation extensions. n, U , C
mean the same as with the classes (we omit the dot for the sake of

-

.

.

+

simplicity). R'x: the referents of x in R. R a: the relation which results
from R if its converse domain is restricted to a; R I:a: the relation which
results from R if its field is restricted to a, a p: the relation which
holds between every element of a and every element of p. x J y: the
relation whose only pair is x, y. as, sym, refl: the class, respectively, of
asymmetrical, symmetrical, and transitive relations.
Quasi analysis ( $ $ 7 1, 73) : Simil'R: the class of similarity circles
based on R. AbstrLR: the class of abstraction classes based on R.
Topology: Dnp (n, a, x, U): a has, in element x, the dimension number n

156

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

relative to a neighborhood relation U. VicidQ: the neighborhood relation, which is determined by the (proximity) relation Q. n Dnhomvic
Q: the field of Q has the homogenous dimension number n relative to
Vicin'Q.

98. Paraphrase in Word Language and Realistic Language
For each symbolic construction formula, we shall give a paraphrase in
words. However, this paraphrase is not to be envisaged as a strict formulation of the construction. Its purpose is to indicate the sense of the
formula in a more understandable, if less precise, manner. On the other
hand, the last two languages each give a new sense for each construction.
According to a symbolism which we used earlier ( ยง 75), the paraphrase in the word language should be enclosed in c=symbols,while the
realistic language corresponds to the expressions which we have previously marked by p-symbols. For each construction, we shall indicate
in realistic language the state of affairs on which it is based.
The introduction of a new symbol through a constructional definition
has a certain economic value; namely, the constructed entity can from
now on, in further statements and constructions, be designated with a
simple symbol instead of the complex constructing expression. In addition, the constructed entity is to be envisaged as a rational reconstruction
of an entity which has already been constructed in a partly intuitive,
partly rational way in daily life or in the sciences; thus, the name this
object bears in daily life guides the choice of the symbol. Hence, the
definition contains, among other things, also an assertion, namely, that a
certain familiar object, as far as its rational concept is concerned, can be
derived from such and such basic concepts in such and such a way. It
must be admitted that it is sometimes not easy to realize that a given
constructed entity corresponds in fact to a certain familiar object. The
schematic construction formulas seem at first strange, but it is also
difficult to recognize in a map the schematic representation of a landscape. The recognition of this agreement is facilitated by the translation
of the construction of an object into the realistic language, for this
translation expresses the fact that the indicated object, and only this
object, possesses certain properties as distinguishing characteristics.

99. The Language o f Fictitious Constructive Operations
The individual constructions will be translated into a fourth language,
into the language of fictitious constructive operations. Here, the con-

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

157

structional definitions are not envisaged as acts of naming (as in the first
and second languages) or as descriptions of familiar objects (as in the
third language), but as operating rules for a constructive procedure. We
shall presently describe in some detail certain appropriate fictions; once
these fictions are introduced, the constructions can be expressed, as it
were, as palpable processes, and thus the translation into this language
satisfies best the desire for intuitive obviousness. This obviousness not
only facilitates understanding, but also has heuristic value. While the
realistic translation, through the continued contact with the facts of
science, regulates the constructions with respect to their content, the
language of constructive operations has a regulating effect with respect
to their form. It precludes an attempted construction, as it were, automatically during the preliminary considerations, if the new object does
not have a purely formal connection with the already constructed
objects; in such cases, an operative formulation of a construction is
altogether impossible (i.e., we cannot give it the form of an operating
rule for the formation of an inventory list).
Appropriate fictions are chosen by keeping in mind the purpose of the
constructions as rational reconstructions of the recognition of objects.
This reconstruction is to reflect the formal structure of the formation of
objects.sB Hence, we shall introduce, to begin with, the fiction of a
temporal separation between the experience of the raw material of
cognition and our acting upon this material. Thereafter, we introduce
the fiction of the retainability of the given ( ยง 101). As an overriding
fiction, we assume that we have the task of providing a given subject A
with rules for step-by-step operations through which A can amve at the
construction of certain schemata ("inventory lists") which correspond
to the individual objects that are to be constructed ( ยง 102). If a constructional definition can be translated into such an operating rule, then
we can be certain that the construction is purely extensional, as construction theory requires of each construction.
In the sequel ( 3 3 100-102), we shall give a more detailed description
of the presuppositions and the method of the language of constructive
Operations. It must be emphasized that the constructional system itself
has nothing to do with these fictions; they are related only to the fourth
language, whose purpose is purely didactic, namely, to provide
illustrations.
Gegenstandsbiidung

158

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

100. Construction as Rational Reconstruction
The "given" is never found in consciousness as mere raw material, but
always in more or less complicated connections and formations. The
synthesis of cognition, i.e., the formation of entities, or representations of
things and of "reality", from the given, does not, for the most part, take
place according to a conscious procedure.
EXAMPLE. In looking at a house, we perceive it immediately and
intuitively as a corporeal object; we imagine its unperceived back side, its
continued existence while we are not looking at it. We recognize the
determinate, familiar house; yet most of the time no explicit mental
deductions are carried out.

In science, too, synthesis, the formation of objects, and cognition take
place, for the most part, intuitively and not in the rational form of
logical deductions.
EXAMPLE. In perception, the botanist forms the object of an individual plant as a physical object, without thereby engaging in any conscious thinking activity; most of the time, he recognizes intuitively this
thing as a plant of such and such a species.

The fact that the synthesis of cognition, namely, the object formation
and the recognition of, or classification into, species, takes place intuitively, has the advantage of ease, speed, and obviousness. But
intuitive recognition (e.g., of a plant) can become useful for further
scientific work only because it is possible to give, in addition, the
indicators (of the particular species of plant), to compare them with
the perception and thus to give a rational justification of intuition.
The constructional system is a rational reconstruction of the entire
formation of reality, which, in cognition, is carried out far the most part
intuitively. In reconstructing the recognition of the plant, the botanist has
to ask himself what, in the actual act of recognition, v. as really perceived
and what was apperceptive synthesis? 90 But these two components which
are united in the result he can separate only through abstraction. Thus, in
rational reconstruction, construction theory has to distinguish, by means
of abstraction, between the purely given and the synthesis; this division
must be made, not only for the individual case, but for the entire
conscious process.

* Verarbeitung

1 159

101. The Fiction of the Separation and the Retainability of
the Given
The fourth language, namely, the language of "fictitious constructive
operations", has the purpose of illustrating the constructions. In connection with it, we wish to make the assumption that a certain subject A
is to be given operational rules as to how objects are to be formed from
the given. Now we have just seen that it is necessaq for construction
theory to carry out in abstraction a separation between the purely given
and the synthetic components (i.e., the constructional forms). In the
present context, this is expressed as the fiction of the temporal separation
of the given from the synthesis; during the first part of his life, A merely
absorbs the given, without working upon it, and then, in the second
part of his life, he synthesizes the retained material according to the rules
which we have given him, without absorbing, during this part of his life,
any more of the given. The only fictitious assumption concerning the
experience (i.e., the contents of the first part of A's life) is the abstraction from all synthetic aspects. The further fictions are concerned only
with the second part of his life. Here we ascribe certain abilities to A
so that he is in a position to carry out this synthesis, and finally we also
deny him certain bits of information so that the synthesis takes place only
within the framework which is determined through the constructional
method. We think of all synthetic elements, and thus of all thought
processes, as separated from the experiences only for the purpose of this
auxiliary language of fictitious construction. It is understood that, in
construction proper, all content which occurs in experiences must be
reflected in the constructions; thus, the acts of thought must also be
constructed (cf. 8 85).
In order to be able to apply the indicated fictional separation, we have
to assume a further fiction, namely, that the given which has been experienced is not forgotten, but that A retains it in his memory, or that
he makes a protocol of it, since otherwise there would be no material to
be synthesized in the second part of his life. This fiction of the retainability of the given deviates from reality in various ways. To begin with,
real life, many things are forgotten, and, furthermore, we do not
generally retain in our memory the raw given, but high-level, synthesized
for example, physical or heteropsychological objects.
In construction, it is not essential to reproduce the process of cognition

"

-

''Verarbeitctes hoher Stufc

160

TEE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF TEE CONSTRUCTION SYSTEM I 181

I THE U)GZCAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

in all its aspects. During the discussion of the problem of the basic relations, we have already explained that, of the many relations which hold
between the experiences, we postulate only the smallest number necessary
to be able, in principle, to construct reality from them. "In principle"
means that we shall disregard the question whether the construction of an
individual object requires much or only a little material. As it were, each
construction must be understood in the following way: "This object can
be constructed in such and such a way from the given, provided only
that a sufficient supply of the given is available." In the language of
constructive operations, this aspect of the construction is to be expressed
through the fiction that A does not forget anything of the given.
There is another assumption which is connected with the fiction of the
retainability of the given, namely, that each element of the given (each
elementary experience) is identically retained, so that, during the synthesis, it can be utilized more than once and can be identified each time as
identically the same. In our fiction, we could express this, for example,
by saying that each individual elementary experience is provided with
an arbitrary, but permanent, token, for example, an (arbitrary) number.

102. The Fiction ofthe Basic Relation Lists
We realized earlier ( 3 75) that construction theory may assume, as its
initial material for the constructional system, not a property description,
but merely a pair list of the elementary experiences which is based on the
basic relation of the constructional system. In the language of constructive operations, this assumption is expressed by saying that, of the
elementary experiences which A has in the first part of his life, A may
not retain or record the individual properties of these elementary experiences, but only the pair list based on the basic relations. This is to say,
A may retain an inventory list of each basic relation as a list of the
number pairs of those elementary experiences between which the basic
relation in question holds; thus, in our constructional system, A may
retain nothing but the pair list of the only basic relation Rs. Constructions of impermissible (namely, not purely "operative" or "extensional")
form cannot be expressed as operational rules; herein lies the regulative
value of the indicated fiction.
The constructional system is a rational reconstruction of a process of
cognition whose results are already known. Consequently, we add to the
fiction of this language of constructive operations the assumption that,
even though A does not know all of reality, it is known to us, since we

have to give A his rules of procedure. It is only on the basis of this
knowledge that we know which constructional steps are appropriate for
each level and to which entity each of them leads, even though we do not
know of what nature A's experiences are. Thus, for the purposes of this
fiction, we assume that we know the sense D2 of the basic relation(s) so
that, starting from it (them), we can lead A to the entities which we have
in mind. On the other hand, we are not familiar with the basic relation
list(s) of A. This fiction forces us to formulate constructions as operational rules independently from the individual subject. A, on the other
hand, is familiar only with his relation list(s), but not with the sense of
the basic relation(s).
The utility of the fictions which we have introduced has now become
clear. They help us to maintain and examine the conceptual purity of the
operational rules and thus of the constructional definitions. It is absolutely necessary that this purity be strictly maintained, either with the
aid of such fictions or otherwise. Philosophical discussions which are
somehow concerned with constructions frequently make the mistake of
not restricting themselves to those data which may occur in the construction of an object.
Thus the translation of each construction into the language of constructive operations has the form of a rule. A uses this rule to produce,
step by step, the inventory list of each constructed object, starting with
his inventory list of the basic relation(s). If the object is constructed as
a class, then the inventory list states the elements of the class; in the case
of a relation extension, it states the member-pairs. A furnishes all constructed objects with individual, but arbitrary, tokens, for example,
numbers, so that they may be mentioned in further lists. After the formation of each new inventory list, A is to produce supplemental entries.Oa
That is to say, for each object, A produces, in addition to the inventory
list, which is immediately given in its final version, also an object
description, which is constantly enlarged through supplemental entries
from later constructions. The supplemental entries of the inventory list
of a class consist in attaching to the object description of each of its
elements the information that this element belongs to this class. We have
discussed examples of this in connection with quasi analysis, where
certain classes were assigned to their elements as quasi constituents. The
supplemental entries of the inventory list of a relation consist in the
following: in the object descriptions of each of its members, it is noted

-

Beziehungssinn
Riickubertragung

162

/

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WOALD

to which other members it stands in this relation (extension) and which
other members stand in this relation (extension) to it. Thus, the inventory list and object description of an object in the language of
constructive operations correspond to what, in realistic language, is called
definite description and characterization of an object. The definite d e
scription gives only necessary and sufficient characteristics for the
determination that precisely this object is present. The characterization
mentions all further known properties and relations of the object. The
subsequent applications will clearly show how the inventory lists and
object descriptions are to be formed (IV, A, 5 108 ff. always under the
heading "fictitious operation").
The question now arises whether it is always possible to translate a
constructional definition into such an operating rule concerning the
formation of an inventory list of a new object from the inventory lists of
the basic relation(s) and the previously constructed objects. This requirement of operativeness of the constructions is easily fulfilled if the
logistic language is used; the constructional definitions must have the
form of extensional definitions. From the logical theory of extensions, it
follows that the inventory list of a newly defined concept can be formed
if this concept is defined as an extension (i.e., class or relation extension)
and if the inventory lists of the other concepts which are mentioned in the
definition are known. (About the concept of extension, cf. 5 32; about
the extensional method of construction, cf. $ 5 43, 45.)

103.About the General Rules o f Construction
103 to 105 may be omitted)

(ยงยง

System form and object forms of the constructional system are empirically
determined; i.e., these forms depend upon reality and the individual
objects which are presupposed as empirically known. However, when
we are confronted on a given level with a certain empirical situation,
then we may proceed in such and such a way or ways and in no other
way; this must depend upon certain formal properties in the actual
process of cognition as well as in the corresponding constructional
system which is its reconstruction. Thus each constructional step can be
envisaged as the application of a general formal rule to the empirical
situation of the level in question. By empirical situation, we mean the
properties of the already constructed entities which, even though formal,
are nevertheless given only empirically. For example, we find through
empirical investigation whether a certain constructed relation is transi-

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF 'lmCONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

/

163

tive or not, etc., or whether or not two classes partially overlap, etc.
The formal rule, however, is not itself empirical inasmuch as it represents an implication which holds, not only for a special level, but for
each place of the constructional system.
These general rules could be called a priori rules, since the construction and cognition of the object is logically dependent upon them.
However, we cannot become conscious of these rules except through
abstraction from already formed or constructed experiences. Since the
constructions of the individual objects are, for the most part, known with
only very little precision, we are not in a position to carry out this
abstraction (the constructional system which is sketched in the sequel
gives the construction of individual objects only for the lower levels and,
even in these cases, only in an experimental way, while the constructions of the higher levels are merely indicated). However, the rules are
not to be designated as "a priori knowledge", for they do not represent
knowledge, but postulation^.^^ In the actual process of cognition, these
postulations are carried out unconsciously. Even in scientific procedures,
we are rarely conscious of them and they are rarely made explicit.

104.Tentative Formulation of Some Construction Rules
A system of general constructional rules (i.e., of rules which hold for
any level) cannot yet be given for the reasons indicated above. Let us
nevertheless attempt to formulate some such rules in order to show what
is meant by "general rules" and what they would have to look like.
These formulations have the character merely of a tentative example.
(Concerning the terminology of the theory of relations, cf. $5 11, 34.)
1. If any relation O5 is given (no matter whether it is a basic relation
or a constructed relation on any level), then its domain, its converse
domain, and (if possible, i.e., if the relation is homogeneous) its field is
constructed. (We shall later apply this rule in the construction of elex,
8 109.)
The purpose of rules 2 through 7 consists in making possible a
quasi analysis according to rules 8 and 9; these rules form the complete
disjunction of all cases of homogeneous relations. (For the application of
quasi analysis, according to 5 71, symmetry and reflexivity of the relation are required; for the simplest form, according to 5 73, we also
require transitivity.)

"Festsetzungen

"relation" for "Relation"throughout 5

104

164

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

I THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD
2. If a homogeneous relation P is given which is neither symmetrical
nor reflexive, we construct the relation Q as the union of P, its converse, and of PO. Q is then symmetrical and reflexive, so that rule 7, 8, or
9 becomes applicable. (This rule is used in the construction of Ps, 5 110.)
3. If a nonsymmetrical, reflexive relation P is given, we construct Q
as the union of P and its converse. In this case, Q is symmetrical and
reflexive, so that rule 7, 8, or 9 becomes applicable.
4. If a symmetrical, nonreflexive, nontransitive relation P is given,
whose chain (power relation) becomes trivial (i.e., holds for all pairs of
its field), we construct Q as the union of P and Po. In this case, Q is
symmetrical, reflexive, and nontransitive, so that rule 7 or 8 becomes
applicable.
5. If a symmetrical, nonreflexive, and nontransitive relation P is
given, whose chain does not become trivial (cf. rule 4), we construct Q
as the chain (including identity) of P. In this case, Q is symmetrical,
reflexive, and transitive, so that rule 9 can be applied. (This rule is
applied for Colid, 5 118.)
6. If a symmetrical, nonreflexive, transitive relation P is given, we
construct Q as the union of P and PO. In this case, Q is symmetrical,
reflexive, and transitive, so that rule 9 can be applied.
7. If a symmetrical, reflexive, and nontransitive relation P is given,
whose chain does not become trivial (cf. rule 41, we construct Q as the
chain of P. In this case, Q is symmetrical, reflexive, and transitive, so that
rule 9 can be applied. (This rule is appliedin the construction of seme,
8 115).
8. Iยฃ a symmetrical, reflexive, and nontransitive relation Q is given
whose chain becomes trivial (cf. rule 4), we apply quasi amlysb
(according to 8 71) to Q, i.e., we construct the class of similarity circles
of Q (used for similcirc, 5 111; place, 117).
9. If a symmetrical, reflexive, transitive relation Q is given, we apply
quasi analysis (in the simplest form, according to 73) to Q, i.e., we
construct the class of abstraction classes of Q (used for sense, analys,,
color, 55 115, 116, 118).
10. If the similarity circles of Q which result through quasi analysis
according to rule 8 or 9 do not overlap or overlap only very little, then
we consider them quasi constituents of their elements.
11. On the other hand, if the similarity circles of Q overlap to a considerable extent and in a systematic order, then we determine the quasi
constituents by constructing the largest possible subclasses of the similarity circles of Q which (aside from small pieces) are not divided
through the mutual dissections of the similarity circles of Q; cf. 172
(used for qual, 5 112).
12. If, among the quasi constituents which are formed on the basis of

I

185

Q according to rule 10 or 11, there are pairs such that all elements of
the referent stand in the relation Q to all elements of the relatum, then
we construct the relation S which is determined through these pairs as
the proximity relation between the quasi constituents (used for Sim,
5 114).
13. On the basis of the relation S, which is constructed according to
rule 12, we divide the quasi constituents into connected areas by constructing the abstraction classes of the S-chain (used for sense, ยง 115).
14. On the basis of S (according to rule 12), we determine the properties of order of the quasi constituents within each of the connected
areas (according to rule 13), especially the dimension number.
15. If the order of one of the areas (according to rule 14) deviates
in certain general properties (e.g., dimension number) from those of all
other areas, then this area is marked out through a constructional definition (used for sight, 5 115).

I

105. The Problem of Deducing the Construction Rules
Now the question arises whether the general construction rules, of
which we have tentatively given a few examples, could perhaps all be
derived from a supreme principle and what the nature of this principle
could be. We can here only raise this question, not answer it, since we
have not even formulated the general rules themselves. We c a ~ o even
t
assert with assurance the existence of such a supreme principle.
In a certain sense, the method for the determination of the principle
of construction is analogous to the determination of the single world
formula for the physical processes. In both cases, we must proceed inductively from experience. In our case, we must abstract from the
individual constructive steps which are found in the constructional
system general rules for such steps, for example, the rules of the indicated
examples. Furthermore, we must attempt to condense groups of such
rules into more general rules (for example, rules 2 through 7 of the
above examples into a more general rule of roughly this form: a
homogeneous relation is to be transformed in as simple a way as possible,
so that quasi analysis becomes applicable to it), until a single, most
general rule results. If, in physics, the world formula were already
known, then all the individual natural laws could be derived deductively
without reference to experience. In exactly the same way, all the general

constructional rules could be deduced from the supreme principle of
Construction without reference to experience, i.e., without reference to
any concrete construction within the constructional system. But here,

1fM

I

THE LOCICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

as there, the supreme principle is not known, but forms, for the time
being, only a goal for research, a goal of which we d o not even know
whether it can be reached. In a deductive system of physics, we would
identify the individual formally deduced laws and forms of invariants O6
with empirically known natural laws and object types, for example,
chemical elements. In the same way, in a deductive constructional
system, the particular, formally deduced entities would be identified
with certain empirically known objects (things, properties, relations,
events).
Even if the supreme principle of construction were already known, we
still would have a further task, namely, to ascertain why it should be
necessary, in view of the contribution of cognition to the larger context
of life's purposes, that experiences are formed into objects in just the
way expressed in the constructional system, in the general rules of
construction and, most succinctly, in the supreme principle of construction. Given the present state of our knowledge, this teleological problem
of the formation of knowledge can be attacked, not as a whole, but only
in some of its details. Thus one could concern himself, for example, with
the tendencies t o reify 97 and attribute causal efficacy, which become
noticeable at the higher levels of construction. At present, we shall deal
no further with this problem.

Summary

A. The Ascension Forms (2645)

Frequently, signs are introduced in order to make it possible to speak about
objects of a certain type in an abbreviated way, where the sign in question
does not designate an object (of that type). In such a case, one often speaks
of the sign as if it designated an object of a new type, even though, strictly
speaking, it designates nothing; if this is the case, we will say that the
sign designates a quasi object ("quasi" relative to the object type given
in the fist place) (27). From a sentence, which is the sign of a proposition, we generate the sign of a propositional function by introducing
variables, or blanks, in the place of partial signs; we can then substitute
"arguments" in the "argument positions". Each propositional function represents a concept: if it has one argument position, it represents a property;
88

Stabilitatsforrnen

" Substantialisierung

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

/

187

if it has several, a relation (28). Upon substitution of a "permissible" argument, a (true or false) sentence is generated; if other substitutions are made,
a meaningless sign is produced. If two objects are permissible arguments for
one and the same argument position of any propositional function, then
they are called "isogenous", otherwise "allogeneous". The object sphere of
an object is the class of all objects that are isogenous with it (29). An object
type is called "pure" if all its objects are isogenous with one another. Most
ordinary object types are impure: no logically unobjectionable concepts
correspond to them. I n ordinary language (even in science), almost every
word designates several concepts from different spheres. The "confusion of
spheres" creates many logical, and consequently also philosophical, perplexities (30, 3 1).
Propositional functions which are satisfied by the same arguments are
called "universally equivalent" or "coextensive". To such functions are
assigned identical "extension symbols". Such a symbol is said to designate
the extension of a function. Hence extensions are quasi objects (32). The
extension of a property is called a class, that of a relation, a relation extension. Thus class and relation extension are quasi objects (relative to the elements of the class and the terms of the relation extension, respectively)
(33, 34). A concept a is constructed from b, c by producing its "constructional definition", is., by producing a translation rule which indicates for all
cases how a propositional function about a can be transformed into a coextensive propositional function about b, c. If such a rule exists, then a is
said to be reducible to b, c or to a "(logical) complex" of b, c. Hence, class
and relation extension are complexes of their elements or members, respectively (35). An (extensive) whole is isogenous with its parts no matter
whether it is a "true whole" ("organic whole", Gestalt) or a mere "collection".
Since a class and its elements are allogeneous, it follows that it is not the
whole, let alone the mere collection, of its elements; rather, it is a quasi
object which serves to represent that which the elements have in common
(36, 37).
The simplest case of a constructional definition of a out of b, c consists in
the indication of an expression in terms of b, c which is equivalent with a:
explicit definition. If such a definition is impossible, then a rule must be
given for the translation of entire sentence forms (propositional functions)
in which a occurs into b, c: definition in use (both forms are called "explicit
definitions in the wider sense" to distinguish them from implicit definitions)
(38, 39). In the formulation of a constructional system we speak of ascending to a new level whenever an object allogeneous to the preceding objects
is constructed. This can take place only through definitions in use. Through
such a definition, an extension symbol, i.e., the sign of a class or relation
extension, is introduced. Hence class and relation extension are the ascension
f o r m of the constructional system (40). Through repeated and sometimes

168

I

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

intermixed application of the ascension forms we construct, within the
constructional system, all objects out of the basic objects of the system;
hence the unity of the object domain (due to the unity of the system) and,
on the other hand, the plurality of (allogeneous) object types which follows
from the multiplicity of construction forms (41 ) . The relation being-holding
obtains between each constructional level and the next higher one (42).
Against the extensional method of construction theory (each concept is
represented by an extension) the objection is raised that there may be statements about concepts which cannot be expressed with the aid of the extension
symbol of the concept, namely, "intensional statements". The objection is
overcome through the thesis of extensionality: there are no intensional, but
only extensional, statements (i.e., statements that can be transformed into
statements about extensions) (43, 45). This thesis is founded upon the
distinction between "sign statements", "sense statements", and "nominatum
statements"; it turns out that the extensional and the allegedly intensional
propositions about a concept are not concerned with the same object (44).

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONALSYSTEM

1 169

mentations are reducible to manifestations; thus, all cultural objects can
in the end be reduced to psychological ones and are epistemically secondary
with respect to them (55, 56). All physical objects are (either directly or
through the mediation of other physical objects) reducible to sensory qualities (of acts of perception). On the other hand, all psychological objects
are reducible to physical objects (either through the psychophysical relation
or through the expression relation) (57). Hence there are several possible
system forms: the basis (the domain of the basic objects) is either physical
or psychological. We must divide the psychological objects into two classes
with respect to epistemic primacy: the autopsychological objects are epistemically primary relative to the physical objects, while the heteropsychological objects are secondary to them. Hence, in the epistemic system form, the
most important object types occur in the following sequence: autopsychological, physical, heteropsychological, and cultural objects (58). There exists
another system form with physical basis (materialistic system form) (59).
The basis of the epistemic system form lies in the autopsychological domain;
still another system form has a general-psychological basis (60).

B. The System Forms (4660)
1. FORMAL INVESTIGATIONS (46-53)

The problem of the system form: how to formulate the constructional system so that all scientific objects find a place in it? (46). To solve this problem, the reducibility relations of the objects must be investigated. In the
realistic, or matter of fact, language which is customary in the empirical
sciences, "a is reducible to b, c" means the same as "for each state of affairs
relative to a ( b , c ) , a necessary and sufficient condition can be indicated
which depends upon b and c alone" (47), or "there is an infallible and always
present indicator which can be expressed through b and c". Since, in principle, science can produce such an indicator for every concept, it follows that
all scientific objects are constructable (48, 49). The "constructional transformation", i.e., the transformation of a statement or propositional function
with the aid of a constructional definition is a "logical translation", not a
"translation of sense"; that is to say, it leaves the logical value unchanged
(namely, the truth value of a proposition or the extension of a propositional
function). but not always the epistemic value (50, 5 1 ) .
2. MATERL4L INVESTIGATIONS (54-60)
An object a is called epistemically primary relative to b (where b is called
epistemically secondary) if the recognition of b presupposes that of a.
For our outline of the constructional system we wish to choose the epistemic
system form: each object is constructed out of those other objects which
are epistemically primary relative to it. Hence, in addition to their reducibility. the epistemic primacy of the object types must also be investigated
(54). The cultural objects are not only reducible to, but are also recognized
through, their manifestations and documentations. However, all docu-

C. The Basis (61-83)
1. TEE BASIC ELEMENTS (61-74)
The basic objects from which all others are constructed are the basic relations; their members are called basic elements of the system (61). The
epistemic system form, which we have chosen, has its basis in the autopsychological domain ("methodological solipsism") (64). However, the
concept of the "self" does not belong to the initially given (65). In spite
of the autopsychological basis, cognition can achieve an intersubjective,
objective status (66). As basic elements within the autopsychological
domain we must choose the elementary experiences (67), which are taken
as unanalyzable units (68). Nevertheless, concept formation must arrive
at the so-called constituents of experiences. The method required for this
is quasi analysis. Essentially, it is a synthetic procedure clad in the language
of analysis. It leads to structures which are substitutes for the constituents
(there actually are no constituents), and which are therefore called quasi
constituents. Quasi analysis consists in the following: the (unanalyzable)
objects are placed in various kinship structures on the basis of a relation
description; the various structures to which an object belongs are then its
"quasi constituents" (69-71). Depending upon the formal properties of the
relation on which it is based, quasi analysis takes different forms. The simplest form occurs in connection with transitive relations: Principle of abstraction. In this case the quasi constituents are called "abstraction classes"
(72-74).
2. THE BASIC RELATIONS (75-83)
Two elementary experiences are called "part identical" if they agree in

170

/

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

one part, "part similar" if they approximately agree in one part. It must be
presupposed that these two relations are recognizable in any perception (76,
77). However, as basic relation we choose the asymmetrical relation, recollection o f similarity, which corresponds to part similarity and contains in it
the direction of time: this relation obtains between expericnces x and y if x
and y are recognized as part similar through a comparison of y with a memory image of x . From this basic relation, part similarity can be derived in a
rather simple fashion (78). Through the application of quasi analysis to
recollection of similarity, "similarity circles" can be derived (80), and
"quality classes" can be derived from the similarity circles. The quality
classes represent the sensory qualities (including emotions). Part identity
is easily derived from the quality classes (81). A survey of *further derivations leads to the supposition that no other basic relation is required (82).
In a sense, the basic relations correspond to the "categories" of traditional
philosophy (83 ) .

D. The Object Forms (84-94)
The problem of object forms: in which form are the individual objects to
be constructed? Object forms are here considered only by way of example;
they do not properly belong to the thesis of construction theory, which concerns itself only with the choice of basis, system form and ascension forms
(84). The objects of the lowest levels have already been mentioned and their
derivability has been investigated; the following additional objects are derivable from them: the relation of similarity between quality classes; the sense
classes as classes of qualities of the individual sense modalities (85); the
definite description of the visual sense with the aid of its dimension number ( 8 6 ) ; the preliminary time order (87); the visual field places and their
order in the visual field (88, 89); the colors and their order in the color
solid (90-92). The constructional separation of the visual field order and
the order of colors depends upon a formal difference between the two
orders: it is impossible that in a single experience two different colors should
appear at the same visual field place, but two visual field places can very
well have the same color. Because of this formal difference, it is possible
that the visual field order and the spatial order which results from it, but
not the color order, can serve as the principle of individuation for reality
(91). It is furthermore possible to derive the sensations in the sense of
individual constituents of experiences (93). From the indicated objects it is
possible to derive the other objects of the autopsychological domain, from
these the physical, and then the heteropsychological and cultural objects (94).

E. Forms o f Representation for a Constructional System (95-105)
The constructional system consists of a structure of definitional chains. The
conceptual purity of this structure can best be safeguarded through the use

THE FORMAL PROBLEMS OF THE CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 171

of a symbolism. Hence, in the structure which we have formulated as an
example, the symbolism of logistics is used as basic language. Parallel translations into three other languages serve to further the ease of understanding
(95). The logistic language is based on the system of Russell and Whitehead,
since this is the only system which possesses a detailed theory of relations
(96,97). The first translation is a paraphrase (of the individual constructional
definitions and theorems) into ordinary word language; secondly, we give
a translation into the realistic language, which describes the states of affairs
at hand (98). The fourth language is the language of fictitious constructive
operations: here each constructional definition is expressed as an operating
rule in a constructive procedure (99). We imagine, in this case, that the
"given" is presented in the form of a "list of the basic relations", i.e., a
number-pair list of the basic relations; the operating rules lead from this list
to further "inventory lists" for all objects (102). Hence, in this fiction, the
contents of the given experiences is separated from their synthesis; we must
make the additional fictitious assumption that the given can be indefinitely
retained (101). The formulation of the constructional system does not attempt
to represent the way in which the various experiential contents are experienced, but rather it is to be an account only of the logical relations which are
contained in them; this is done through a rational reconstruction of the
synthesis of the contents of experience, which in actual experience is for the
most part intuitive (100). Once the individual objects are constructed, an
additional (here unsolved) problem arises: the constructions should be
recognized as special applications of general formal rules ( 103-105).

176

I

OUTLINE O F A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

constructive operations (under the headings "paraphrase", "realistic state
of affairs", "fictitious operations"); then follow statements about the
constructed entities and explanations.
The statements or theorems of a constructional system are divided
into two different types (the following are given as examples for
theorems: Th. 1-6 in ยง $ 108, 110, 114, 117, 118). The first type of
theorem can be deduced from the definitions alone (presupposing the
axioms of logic, without which no deduction is possible at all). These
we call analytic theorems. The second type of theorem, on the other
hand, indicates the relations between constructed objects which can be
ascertained only through experience. We call them empirical theorems.
If an analytic theorem is transformed into a statement about the basic
relation(s), a tautology results; if an empirical theorem is thus transformed, it indicates empirical, formal properties of the basic relation(s).
Expressed in the realistic language, this means that the analytic theorems
are tautological statements about concepts (these statements are not
necessarily trivial, since the tautology may become apparent only after
the transformation, as is the case with mathematical theorems); the
empirical theorems express an empirically ascertained state of affairs.
REFERENCES. In Kantian terminology, the analytic theorems are
analytic judgments a priori; the empirical theorems are synthetic judgments a posteriori. It is the contention of constmction theory that there
are no such things as the "synthetic judgments a priori" which are essential for Kant's approach to epistemological problems.

As concerns the content of our constructional system, let us emphasize
again that it is only a tentative example. The content depends upon the
material findings of the empirical sciences; for the lower levels in particular, upon the findings of the phenomenology of perception, and
psychology. The results of these sciences are themselves subject to
debate; since a constructional system is merely the translation of such
findings, its complete material correctness cannot be guaranteed. The actual purpose of our exposition of construction theory is to pose the problem of a constructional system, and to carry out a logical investigation of
the method which will lead to such a system; the formulation of the system is not itself part of the actual purpose. We have nevertheless
formulated some levels of the system and have indicated further levels.
We have done this mostly to illustrate the problem, rather than to attempt
a beginning of its solution.

I I77

107. The Logical and Mathematical Objects
Even before the introduction of the basic relation(s), we must construct
the logical objects, or objects of pure logistics. Once the basic concepts
of any object domain are introduced, e.g., the basic relation(s) of the
constructional system, pure logistics is transformed into applied logistics;
this holds in particular for the theory of relations. It is not necessary
here to give an explicit account of the system of pure logistics.
REFERENCES. A complete version of this system has been given
by Russell and Whitehead [Princ. Math.], including the mathematical
objects. Cf. the bibliography about logistics in 13 and the explanation
of logistic symbols in ยง 97.

The following basic concepts are required: incompatibility of two
statements and validity of a propositional function for all arguments.
Then the further connectives for two statements and negation are constructed as the first logical objects from the basic concepts; also, identity
and existence. Then classes and relation extensions with their respective
connectives are introduced, and finally all objects of the general theory
of relations. (Cf. 8 25 for the independence of logical objects from
psychological and physical objects.)
Mathematics forms a branch of logistics (i.e., it does not require any
new basic concepts). It is not necessary here to give an account of the
formation of the system of mathematical objects; let us merely recall
its main levels.
On the basis of the logical objects, we construct at first the arithmetical
objects: cardinal numbers (cf. !j 40); then the general relation numbers (or "structures," cf. 8 1I ) , which are less frequently employed
in mathematics; as a special type of the latter, we then construct the
ordinal numbers. For each type of number, we construct its connectives;
furthermore, the (general) series, the rational numbers, the real numbers,
the vectors, etc.
Geometrical objects, too, are purely logical objects, i.e., they can be
constructed within the system of logistics with the indicated basic concepts. By "geometry" we mean here purely mathematical, abstract
geometry which is not concerned with space in the ordinary sense of the
word, but concerned with certain multidimensional ordered structures
which are also called "space", or, more precisely, "abstract spa&.
ea Relationszahlen

178

I

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

OLlTLME OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

Intuitive, phenomenally spatial objects form a special object domain;
they belong to the real objects and can be constructed only later, after
the introduction of the basic relation(s) of the constructional system
( ยง 125).

A, not to us. On the other hand, only we, but not A, know the sense of
the basic relation (as it has been given in $ 78). Without knowing this
sense, A can ascertain, from his basic relation list (i.e., empirically), the
theorem Th. 1 below; this theorem states that no pair occurs in both
orders of members ( a , b and b, a ) in that list. For each of the argumenb
of the basic relation, A begins an object description. These descriptions
will later on grow in content; for the time being, A merely uses his basic
relation list to ascertain for each member to which member it stands in
the basic relation and which members stand to it in that relation. This
way of using the basic relations list for object descriptions corresponds to
supplemental entries as they occur in connection with objectr which are
coiitructed later on.
Theorem: Th. 1 Rs c as (empirical).
Paraphrase: Rs is asymmetrical.

--

It is important to notice that the logical and mathematical objects are
not actually objects in the sense of real objects (objects of the empirical
sciences). Logic (including mathematics) consists solely of conventions
concerning the use of symbols, and of tautologies on the basis of these
conventions. Thus, the symbols of logic (and mathematics) do not desk0
nate objects, but merely serve as symbolic fixations of these conventions.
Objects in the sense of real objects (including quasi objects) are only
the basic relation(s) and the objects constructed therefrom. All signs
which have a definite meaning are called constants and are thus dis.- --tinguished from the variables ( 8 28). The logical consran& are signs for
logical objects; the nonlogical constants are signs for real objects (concepts of an object domain).

109. The Basic Elements (elex)
Construction:
elex = at C'Rs
--..-.
Paraphrase: The Rs-members are called elementav experiences.
Realistic state of aoairs: The recollection of similarity holds between
elementary experiences; thus, since they are arguments of the basic relation, they a r e the basic elements ( $ 67).
Fictitious operation: A forms the inventory list of class elex as the
number list of all members which occur in the basic relation list. The
supplemental entries are here rather trivial, since A enters into the object
descrivtion which he has previously started ($ 108) for each clement the
remark that it belongs to-the class elex.
-

~

(Rs)

Basic relation: Rs
Paraphrase: Recollection o f similarity (cf. $ 78).
Realistic state of aflairs: x and y are elementary experiences, where a
recollected representation of x is compared with y and found to be part
similar to it (i.e., x and y are found to agree approximately in a collrrituent, 3 78).
Fictitious operation: The o d y material which A has for synthesis is

178

the basic relation list, the inventory list of Rs. This list contains pairs of
terms of the relation extension, each argument designated by an arbitray
but determinate token (number), cf. 102. This list is known only to

REFERENCES. The derivability of geometrical concepts from logistics has been demonstrated through the investigations of Pieri, Peano,
Huntington, Russell, Veblen, and others. A comprehensive discussion
with bibliography has been given by Couturat [Prim.], Chapter VI.
Cf. also the examples of geometrical systems in Carnap [Logistik].
Volume IV of Whitehead and Russell's [Princ. Math.], which was to
give a detailed statement of the derivation of geometry from logistics,
has not yet appeared.
About the differencebetween the so-called "space" of the pure theory
of relations and the actual space of intuition, see Carnap [Raum]. (See
also the bibliography on the subject in [Raum], 78 ff.) Keyser [Math.
Phil.] gives an explicit account of the logical sense of abstract eeometrv
-as a mere theory form (theory function, "doctrinal function");" cf. alsi
Weyl [Handb.].

108. The Basic Relation

[

~

110. Part Similarity ( P s )

L

Construction: Ps = ar Rs U Rs U Rso
Paraphrare: Two elementary experiences x and y are called part
similar if the relation Rs holds either between x and y or between y and
x or if x and y are identical Rs-members.
Realistic state of afairs: If a recollection of similarity holds between
elementary experiences x and y, then a pan of x is similu to a p a of y
and a part of y is similar to a part of x (cยฃ. ยง ยง 78, 77).

180

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

Fictitious operation: A forms an inventory list of the relation Ps by
entering all pairs of the Rs list; furthermore, also the converse pairs
(i.e., in addition to a, b, always also b, a) and finally all identity pairs of
members of the list (a,a; b,b; etc.). In this case, the supplemental
entries consist in the following: after having previously begun his object
descriptions ( ยง 108), A now uses the Ps list to supplement them by
noting in each object description of a member of Rs (i.e., an elementary
experience) to which others it stands in the relation Ps.
While A ascertains the empirical theorems on the basis of his list, the
analytic theorems follow from the definition, thus do not require any
confirmation through the inventory list. For example, Th. 2 and Th. 3
follow directly from the construction of Ps.
Theorems: Th. 2. Ps c syrn (analytic).
Th. 3. Ps c ref1 (analytic).
Paraphrases: Ps is symmetrical; Ps is reflexive.

11 1. Similarity Circles (similcirc)
Construction: similcirc = Sirnil'Ps
Paraphrase: The similarity circles based on Ps (which are formed
through quasi analysis) are briefly called similarity circles.
Explanation: The indicated construction consists in the application of
quasi analysis ( ยง 71) to Ps according to the derivation in $ 80. According to Th. 1 and Th. 2, Ps has the properties required for this purpose,
namely, symmetry and reflexivity.
Realistic state of affairs: Let us determine, in any quality domain, the
largest possible class of qualities which are all in proximity of one
another and thereafter the class of elementary experiences in which these
qualities occur; then any two of these elementary experiences are part
similar to one another, and no elementary experience outside of these is
part similar to all of them (cf. $ 80).
Fictitious operation: A is to compose the inventory list for all classes
of elementary experiences which are similarity circles based on Ps. For
this purpose, A determines at first all classes of part similar experiences;
he Starts with the unit classes of elementary experiences which belong to
those classes because of the reflexivity of Ps. Then he forms the classes
of two members by tabing the pairs from the relation list of Ps; then he
forms classes three of members, etc. Finally, he erases from his list all
subclasses of other classes on the list. The remaining classes are the
desired similarity circles. A now numbers the classes which he has found

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

[

I81

in order to be able to mention them individually. (This numbering has
nothing to do with the numbering of elementary experiences.) He then
enters all these class numbers into the inventory list of the class
"similcirc"; into the inventory list of each of the classes which he has
found, he enters the numbers of the elementary experiences which belong
to it. Supplemental entries of similarity circles: A enters into the object
description of each elementary experience the similarity circles to which
it belongs (he designates the similarity circles by the newly introduced
numbers).

112. Quality Classes (qual)
Construction: qua1 =

6 {(-y)

a C 8.x-eS)

-

>

: -yssirnilcirc. Ncl(a n -y) / Nc'a
?h
: x c a . 3 . ( 3 8) . 8 c similcit'c

. 3 . a C y : . (x)

.

Paraphrase: A class k of elementary experiences is called a quality
class if'k is totally contained in each similarity circle which contains at
least half of it, and if, for each elementary experience x which does not
belong to k, there is a similarity circle in which k is contained, but to
which x does not belong (according to the derivation in ยง 8 1 1.
Realistic state of aflairs: The classes of elementary experiences which
have a certain constituent in common are the largest classes which remain
undivided when the similarity circles are divided through mutual partial
overlapping, except for the splitting off of insignificant parts (cf. ยง 8 1).
(In translating the constructional language into the realistic language,
we must observe the circumstance, which has been repeatedly mentioned,
that a class does not consist of its elements [$ 371. Thus, a quality class is
not the whole or the collection of the individual experiences which
belong to it, but it is a quasi object which represents that which its
elements [i.e., the elementary experiences] have in common.)
Fictitious operation: For each pair of similarity circles which have
a considerable past (at least half of one of them) in common, A forms
the intersection and the two remainder classes. The resulting classes, if
they have a considerable part in common with any other similarity circle,
are again divided, etc., until classes are reached which are not divided
through any similarity circles in the indicated way. These are the desired
quality classes. M e r A has thus produced the inventory list for each
quality class (i.e., a list of numbers of those elementary experiences
which belong to the indicated class), he then numbers the quality classes
which he has found, in an arbitrary way. We who know the sense of the

182

1

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE W O R L D

basic relation, and thus also the sense of the constructed entities, know
that the quality classes are the individual visual qualities, tones,
fragrances, etc., but we do not as yet have a way of telling A whether a
given quality class that he has formed is a tone, let alone which definite
tone it represents. Eventually, we must come to the point where we can
give him such information even though we do not know his inventory
lists. For this is precisely the central thesis of construction theory, that
each object about which a meaningful scientific statement can be made
can be constructed. In the constructional language, this thesis is confirmed by the fact that we can later on convey to A the above-mentioned
identifications.
The inventory list of the class "qual" lists the individual numbers
which have been given to the quality classes. A produces the supplemental
entries on the basis of the inventory lists of the individual quality classes
by entering into the object description of each elementary experience the
quality classes to which it belongs.

1 13. Part Identity (Pi)

r

Construction: Pi = Df c quo1 I E
Paraphrase: Two elementary experiences are called part identical if
there is a quality class to which both belong.
Realistic state of aflairs (trivial) : If there exists a quality which occurs
in each of two elements, then these two elements agree in a constituent
(cf. $ $ 76, 82).
Fictitious operation: Translation into the language of constructive
operations is here and in the sequel generally no longer necessary; the
previously given examples should sufice. The method remains the same;
we give A a rule, on the basis of which he produces the inventory list of
the new object; then he carries out the supplemental entries for the
preceding objects which participate in the new object, whereby the object
descriptions are more and more enriched.

114. Similarity Between Qualities (Sirn)
Construction: Sirn = D~ a {a, /3 c qua1 . a

/3 C Ps}
Paraphrase: Two quality classes are called similar if each element of
one of them is part similar to each element of the other.
Realistic state of aflairs: It follows from the sense of part similarity
that two qualities are similar to one another (i.e., that they are in quali-

1

183

tative proximity), if and only if each experience in which one of them
occurs is part similar to each experience in which the other occurs
( $ 9 77, 85).
Fictitious construction: The supplemental entries of Sim are produced.
This starts the object descriptions of the individual quality classes.
Theorem: Th. 4. Sim E sym n ref1 (analytx).
Paraphrase: Sim is symmetrical and reflexive.

I

1 15. Sense Classes and Visual Sense (sense, sight)
Construction: sense = df Abstr'Sim,
Paraphrase: The abstraction classes of the Sim-chain are called sense
classes.
Explanation: The construction takes place through quasi analysis
(simplest form, $ 7 3 ) . The Sim-chain is transitive; also, according to
Th. 4, symmetrical and reflexive.
In 8 119, we shall translate the definition of sense back into an expression using Rs; the derivation relation of sense is given in $ 121.
Realistic state of affairs: Two qualities can be connected through a
series of qualities, where one quality is always similar to the next, only
if they belong to the same sense modality ( $ 85).
Fictitious operation: Once A has formed the inventory list of the class
sense, whose elements are the sense classes, we know that one of the
sense classes is that of the visual qualities; one, of the fragrances, etc.,
and that there is also one for the emotions (cf. $ $ 76, 85); we have no
way of informing A which is which. On the other hand, A is not permitted
to give us the inventory lists of these individual classes. Thus our fiction
makes explicit the narrow boundaries within which we must solve the
problem of identifying the individual sense modalities or at least of
identifying the visual sense which is basic for the further constructions.
Construction: sight = d ((3~). A c sense . Dnp (5, A, a, Vicin' Sirn)}
Paraphrase: The class sight (the visual sense) includes all those quality
classes in which one sense class has the dimension number 5 relative to
Sim (more precisely, relative to the neighborhood relation which is
determined by Sim; cf. Carnap [Logistik] $ 34b).
Realistic state o f affairs:The visual field is a two-dimensional order of
places such that a color of the three-dimensional color solid can be
correlated to each of these places. The Sim-order of the other senses has
a smaller dimension number (cf. $ 86).

,,

184

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

116. Sensations (sen) and the Divisions o f an Elementary
Experience
Construction: sen = Q ((3 x, a) . a a qua1 .x c a . Q = x 4 a)
Paraphrase: An (ordered) pair, consisting of an elementary experience and a quality class to which the experience belongs, is called a
sensation. (Concerning this expression, cf. $ 93.)
Realistic state of aflairs: Cf. $ 93.
Construction: Simul = df
D) :1 sen
Paraphrase: Two sen-pairs with the same referent are called simultaneous sensations.
Realistic state of affairs: Two individual constituents of experiences
('L~en~ation~")
are simultaneous if they are constituents of the same
experience (cf. ยง 87).
Divisions: According to earlier considerations ( $ 9 3 ) , we have to
distinguish between the individual and general constituents of experiences
(sen as contrasted with qual). Let us designate a class which contains
the constituents of an elementary experience as its "division class"; thus
we have to distinguish two types of division classes which we designate
by div~and divZ.
Construction: Divl = dfAbstr'Sirnul
Paraphruse: The abstraction classes on the basis of Simul are called
"division classes of the first type", Thus, the class of sensations of an
elementary experience is such a class.
Realistic state of afairs: The sensations (in the general sense of an
individual constituent of an experience) which are simultaneous with a
given sensation are sensations of the same experience.
Construction: Divz = X 2 {X a elex . A = a (a c qua1 . x c a ) )
divz = di D'Divz
Paraphrase: The class A of those quality classes to which the element q experience x belongs is called the division class o f x of the second
type (A = Divzlx); such a class is called a division class of the second
type-

(r) I

1 17. Visual Field Places and Visual Field (place, Plid, Proxpl)

,,

Construction: Excl = (Ex LJ I) ;I Sight
place = df jZ (3 I x : (3 A ) . A e Simil'Excl .x = A - s' (Sirnil'Excl - [A]))
Paraphrases: Excl designates (only here, and only for the sake of
abbreviation) the relation extension "exclusive or identical" between

OUTLINE O F A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 189

quality classes of the visual field. A class of quality classes of the visual
field is called a "visual field place" or, briefly, place, if it is not empty
and if it includes those elements of a similarity circle A of Excl which
belong only to A but not to other similarity circles of Excl.
Realistic state o f affairs: Cf. ยง 88. (The places which are here constructed do not necessarily amount to a complete disposition of the
qualities of the visual sense. According to earlier considerations, it is
possible that the places of some exceptional qualities remain undeter-

r

Construction: Plid = df a place I i
Paraphrase: Quality classes of the visual sense are called place
identical if they belong to the same place class.
Construction: Proxpl = df ( E I Sirn I C) i place
Paraphrase: Place classes are called proximate places if a quality class
of one of them is similar to a quality class of the other.
Realistic state of aflairs: Two visual qualities are similar to one
another if and only if they belong to the same or to proximate visual field
places (cf. 5 89).
Remark: The Proxpl-order is the visual field.
Theorem: Th. 5 . 2 Dnhomvic Proxpl (empirical).
Puruphrase: The order of the places on the basis of Proxpl (more
precisely, on the basis of the neighborhood relation which is determined
through Proxpl) has the homogeneous dimension number 2; that is to
say, the visual field is two dimensional.
Fictitious operation to Th. 5: On the basis of the inventory list of
Proxpl which A has produced, he can determine the dimension number of
the Proxpl-order (this possibility shows very clearly that the dimension
number is not a spatial property, but a property which belongs solely to
the theory of relations, and that it is defined in a purely extensional way).
In this way, A h d s empirically that this dimension number equals 2.

118. Colors and Color Solid (Colidprox, Colid, color, Proxcol)
Construction: Colidprox = df

((3 X,

.

A Proxpl p a c X .

. x Proxpl X .x Proxpl p .

A, p)

/3 c A .

4

p

n Sirn'a = p n

-+

Simt/3)

Colid = df Colidproxpo
Paraphrase: 1 . Two quality classes, a,p (of the visual sense) stand to
one another in the relation of color identity in proximate places
(a Colidprox p), if the place of a and the place of /3 are proximate
places and if there is a place a which is proximate to a and to P such that

186

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

the quality classes of p that, are similar to those of a and its quality
classes that are similar to those of p are the same. 2. The Colidproxchain is called color identity (Colid) .
Realistic state of aflairs: Cf. $ 90.
Construction:
color = df AbstrfColid
Proxcol z dt (z I Sirn I c) color
Paraphrase: 1. The abstraction classes of Colid are called "color
classes" or, briefly, colors. 2. Two colors are called proximate colors if a
quality class of one of them is similar to a quality class of the other.
Remarks: The construction of Proxcol is precisely analogous to that of
Proxpl ( $ 117). In general, there is a certain analogy between the division
of visual quality classes into places and their division into colors, and
hence a correlation between the class place and the class color, between
Plid and Colid, between Proxpl and Proxcol. However, the construction
formulas show an analogy o~llyfor the third of these pairs of correlations,
but not for the first two. This has to do with the fact that the relation Plid
is derived from the class place ($ 117), while, inversely, the class color
has been derived from the relation Colid. This disanalogous behavior of
the two orders in the formalism of the construction goes back to the fact
that the spatial order is a principle of individuation, while the color ordering is not. Formally, this shows itself in the fact that, in an experience,
two different qualities may well belong to the same color, but not to the
same place. It may be recalled that it was this formal difference which allowed us to carry out the constructional separation of the two orders
(cf. $ $ 88, 91).
The Proxcol-order is the color solid (cf. $ 90).
Realistic states of aflairs: Cf. $ 90.
Theorem: Th. 6. 3 Dnhomvic Proxcol (empirical).
Paraphrase: The order of the colors on the basis of Proxcol has the
homogeneous dimension number 3; that is to say, the color solid is three
dimensional.

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 187

with, according to the constructional definition of sense ( 3 1IS), we have
sense = Abstr'Sim,
(1)
Since every definition is a rule of replacement, which allows us to
replace in any context the definiendum by the definiens, we can replace
in (1) Sim by its deiiniens ( $ 114). The result is:
sense = Abstrl(a {a, p c qua1 . a .T /I C Ps)),
(2)
Here we replace qual by its definiens and then similcirc and finally also
Ps. The final result is:
sense = Abstr '(a fi {a, /3 c P ( ( y ) : y Sirnil '(Rs U k U RP) NC'(C n
r ) / N ~ ' ( ; > 1 / 2 . > . ( ; C y : . ( x ) : x - c ( . > .(38).8csirnil1(RsU
RS U Rso) . a C 8 . x E 8) . a /IC RS U Rs U R S ~ } ) , ~
(3)
According to this expression, sense is identical (i.e., of the same logical
value) with the expression which stands to the right of the identity sign.
In this expression, Rs is the only nonlogical constant (the Greek letters
and x are variables; the other symbols are logical constants).
A second thesis of construction theory asserts that each scientific
statement is, in the final analysis, a statement about the basic relation(s);
more precisely, each statement can be transformed into another statement which (besides logical constants) contains only the basic relat i o n ( ~ ) ,where the logical value (although not the epistemic value) is
retained. Let us clarify this thesis with the example of Th. 6 of the
three dimensionality of the color solid. With the aid of the constructional
definition of Proxcol, Th. 6 can be transformed, through substitution,

.

-

T

3 Dnhornvic ( i ( Sirn I [=Color
(4)
Through step-by-step substitutions on the basis of the definitions of color,
Colid, Colidprox, Proxpl, place, Excl, sight, sense, Sim, qual, similcirc,
Ps,and a formal simplification we finally obtain from (4) the following
form for Th. 6; in this form, "Rs" is the only nonlogical symbol (Q, x,
and the Greek letters are variables; the other symbols are logical
(3 Q, d . 3 Dnhomvic (i I Q I r) CAbstr ' { a $ ( ( I x, h, p) . x z 1 Q / n .
X ~ I Q I ~ ~ . A ~ ~ Q J ~ ~ . ~! t, :A( j,P )~ . ~p c~ v{ . t~ = p - ~ l ( v l

119. Example of a Retranslation of a Definition a n d a Statement
Construction theory contains the thesis that each scientific concept is
either a class or a relation extension, which can be expressed through the
basic relation(s) alone. In order to make the sense of this thesis quite
clear, let us consider as an example the concept of a sense class (sense).
Let us form, for this concept, an expression which (aside from logical
constants) contains only the symbol "Rs" of the basic relation. To be$

+=

+

Q'p)),.v=Simili((Ex U I) ;1 I
{ ( 3 p ) - ~ e A b s t r ' Q , . Dnp (5,p,a,Vicin'Q)}) . Q = a j
:
y c Sirnil'(Rs U Rs U RsO). Nc
n y ) / Nc '( > M . 3 ( c y : . (x)
"'t. 2 . (38) .8cSirnilJ(Rs U Rs U RsO). a c 8 . x - ~ 8 ) ..?/I

bl)) . a c x . / I r A . p n Q h = p n
I((;

.

(5)

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

188

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

To facilitate understanding:
y

= Sirnil'Excl, Q = Sim

We can see that the expression which uses only the basic relation is
already very complicated, even for a statement on a relatively low level.
This complication increases very considerably for the higher levels, SO
that h a l l y a retrans!ation is practically out of the question. Perhaps this
is one of the reasons that the thesis of the reducibility of all objects and
statements to one or a few basic relations does not seem very plausible
at first sight. The objection that the objects of cognition form an extremely rich manifold is perfectly justified. But it does not follow from
this objection that it is impossible to found this manifold on a narrow
basis, but only that the structure of the system must be sufficiently
complicated in order to be able to represent that manifold through the
multiplicity of constructional forms in spite of the simplicity of the building stones.
The above translations were meant only as illustrative examples.
Precise form in every detail is here not of the essence. Thus, the subsequent considerations are independent of the assumed number (one) and
kind (Rs) of the basic relations. The example which we have carried out
above shows that the empirical statements concerning the threedimensionality of the color solid can be formulated, with our choice of
basis, as a statement about a certain, purely formal, though very complicated, property of the basic relation Rs. In the same way, all empirical
statements o f science can be expressed as statements about purely formal
properties o f the basic relation(s). This holds generally, no matter which
basic relations and no matter what constructional system may be chosen.

120. The Preliminary Time Order
Constructional remark: We can envisage Rs, as relation (extension) of
a preliminary time order, which is not yet without gaps and not yet in
strict serial order. We shall not introduce a new symbol for this relation.
Paraphrase: An elementary experience is called earlier in time t h a
another in the sense of the preliminary time order, if an Rs-chain exists
between them.
Realistic state of affairs: Cf. $ 87.
Remark: The relation of complete temporal order must be a sequential
relation (i.e., not only, like Rs,,, transitive and irreflexive, hence assymmetrical, but also connected) ( $ 11). Rs, is not connected: there will
be pairs of elementary experiences, between which no Rs-chain exists in

I

I8g

either direction. A complete temporal sequence can be constructed only
later with the aid of the regularities of the processes of the outside world.

12 1 . The Derivation Relation 80 of an Object
According to the central thesis of construction theory, it is in principle
possible to fit each scientific object (or concept) into the constructional
system. Now, every object of the constructional system can be represented by an expression which contains the basic relation as its only
nonlogical constant ( $ 119). We obtain the logical form of this expression by replacing the symbol "Rs" of the basic relation by a variable, for
example, R. The relation of this expression to R, we call the derivation
relation of the object in question, since it is also the relation which expresses how the object is derived from the basic relation.
If the object in question is constructed in the system as a class, for
example c, then there is an expression for c which contains only Rs. Let
us abbreviate this expression as +(Rs), so that c = +(Rs); its logical
form is then +(R). The derivation relation of c is then the relation between +(R) and R; hence (since +(R) is a variable class) : (; R {a =

If the object has been constructed as a relation extension, for example

+

G, then there is an expression (Rs) such that G = q (Rs).In this case,
the derivation relation of G is: OR {Q = q (R)}.

In both of the given expressions for the derivation relations, no nonlogical constants occur. Hence, we see that the derivation relation o f m y
object is a purely logical constant.

EXAMPLE. For simplicity's sake, let us consider an object of a
lower level, namely, the class of the sense modalities (sense, 5 115).
The expression for the class sense, which contains only Rs, has been
given earlier ($ 119 [3]). From it results the following definition for the
derivation relation of sense, which we designate by Der(sense).
Der(sense) = df X f? {A = Abstr' (a P {a, /icfZ ((y) : y Sirnil '(R U Il U
R o ) . N c ' ( f n y ) / ~ c ' t > % . 3 . t c y : . ( ~ ): x ~ r t . >. ( I s ) . s t
Simil '(R U R U Ro) . a C 8 . x c 8 ) . a t p C R U R U RO)),,,,)
It is a familiar fact of the theory of axiomatics that an axiomatic
System (for example, a geometric system) can initially be constructed as
a purely logical system, which is subsequently transformed into an

-

Ableitungselation

190

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

empirical theory loo (for example, a physical geometry) by replacing
the primitive concepts of the axiomatic system with empirical concepts.lol
In precisely analogous fashion, the constructional system can initially be
formulated as a purely logical system, where each construction is replaced by the corresponding derivation relation. Through the substitution
of the empirical concept Rs (as the only basic concept of the system) in
place of the variable R, this purely logical system can be transformed
into the actual constructional system of all empirical concepts.

CHAPTER

THE INTERMEDIATE LEVELS:
PHYSICAL OBJECTS

122. The Stated Constructions are Merely Examples
At this place, we shall cease to exhibit the constructions in their explicit
form, namely, as constructional definitions in the language of logistics
and (in part) translations into the other languages.
In concluding the first part of the constructional system, let it be
emphasized again that the determination of the content of the stated
constructions does not belong to the thesis of the present treatise. This
thesis merely asserts the possibility, in general, of a constructional system
and especially of a constructional system of the same form as we have
used here; furthermore, the thesis asserts the applicability and fruitfulness of the indicated method. After the exhibition of the constructional
system, we shall give a more precise statement of these assertions
( $ 156). The only purpose of these constructions was to show the aim of
construction theory more clearly and to illustrate the method. The detailed execution depends upon the results of the empirical sciences. If the
assertions which lie at the basis of indicated constructions are not scientifically tenable, then we must replace them by those findings by which
they are replaced in the sciences; these must then be formulated in the
constructional language and must be fitted into the constructional system. None of this will in any way impair the possibility, in principle, of
translating all scientific statements into statements within a constructional system.
loo
lol

Realtheorie
Realbeme

123. About the Formulation of the Further Constructional Levels
The further constructional levels we shall put forth not in the strict symbolic form of logistics, but merely in a loose paraphrase. We shall also
occasionally omit constructions if they easily result from the context;
thus, we shall state only the most important steps.
The following constructions follow the route which was indicated in
$ 94. To begin with, we shall discuss the method of constructing threedimensional, physical space ( $ 124), and then we shall carry out this
construction as well as the construction of the visual things which d e
pend upon it (3 3 125-128). For the constructional system, the most
important visual thing is my body ( $ 129). It will help us to give definite
descriptions of the various senses, so that with its aid we can supplement
the domain of the autopsychological ($ $ 130-132). Then we shall describe the construction of the world of perception ( S $ 133-135) as well
as the construction of the world of physics ( $ 136), which is quite different from the former. Finally, we shall discuss some physical objects
(persons, the expression relation; 8 137 f.), which are required for the
subsequent construction of the heteropsychological objects.

192

1 THE W G I C A L STRUCTUAE OF THE WORLD

124. Various Possibilities for the Construction of Physical space
The following c o n s t r u ~ t i ~ n step,
al
namely, the transition from the twodimensional order of the visual field to the three-dimensional order of
the space of visual things is one of the most important steps in the conshUctional system. Various attempts were made to solve the problem
of executing
construction; we shall here mention the most important
ones and shall give reasons why we deviate from them.
REFERENCES. The only older work which gives a detailed &scription of this problem is that of Kauffmam [Imman.] 9-31; it is not
necessary to concern ourselves with it here. The first to make a more
precise investigation concerning the derivation of the threedimensional
space order (the "ontogram") from the twodimensional space order
(the "pheno~am") was Gerhards [Aussenwelthyp.]; he was also the
first to employ mathematical techniques. Our derivation differs from
that of Gerhards in the following way: we do not presuppose, and
COnstruct from individual aspects, an unchangeable outside world, but
construct at once the entire fourdimensional space-time world which
comprises all events.
Russell ([External W.1, [Const. Matter], [Sense-Data]) constructs
visual things as classes of their aspects, in fact, not merely as classes
of the real, experienced aspects, but as classes of possible aspects.
method is tenable if, as with Russell, these aspects are taken as basic
elements. We have begun our structure several levels further down;
thus, in order to be able to follow the same route as Russell, we w a
first of all have to construct the aspects from our basic elements, namely,
the elementary experiences. However, this is probably impossible for
aspects which "have not been seen", or at least, it would offer very
considerable difficulties. Hence, it is more advantageous for us to use
a different method, namely, to construct the entire visual world at once,
rather than the individual visual things. Russell's method has the advantage of greater logical simplicity. The advantage of our method
lies, first of all, in the fact that we have used the autopsychological
basis, which Russell himself considers a desirable goal ( ~ f 8. 64), seto n d l ~ ,in the circumstance that unperceived points and states of a
thing are, in our system, not inferred, but constructed. This procedure,
too, Russell considers desirable. (Cf. the motto preceding 8 1; 13;
ISense-Data1 157f., 159). It must be admitted, however, that our
kind of construction of physical points and of the physical space is
by no means a fully satisfactory solution.
similar to those just mentioned have induce. us to avoid

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

183

the procedure which Whitehead ([Space], V a t . Knowledge], mature])
has followed. Whitehead constructs space and time only after the
things, as the structure of the relations which become apparent in the
behavior of things to one another. He emphasizes especially that we
experience, not spatial or temporal points, but extensions; from
we must construct the points according to the method of "extensive
abstraction". Unquestionably, this procedure has great advantages in
method and content; however, we cannot follow it since the problem
of constructing the three-dimensional things or fourdimensional events
from the position relations in the sensory field, especially the visual
field, offer unsurmounted difficulties. (Whitehead fails to indicate a
solution to this problem.)
For the indicated problem, cf. also the discussion of Poincarh ([Wiss.],
[ ~ e r t ] [Letzte
,
Ged.1) about the three dimensionality of space; ยฃ*hermore, cf. Becker ([Geom.] 446 ff.) about the "constitutive steps of
spatiality", following some of Husserl's ideas; also, the discussions of
Carnap [Dreidimens,] and Jacoby [Ontoi.] 100 ff.(The last two hold
that the increase of the dimension number from two to three in the
constructional step under discussion has the purpose of permitting the
construction of causal regularity.)
The indicated investigations are important, since they (in contrast
to some other systems) recognize and discuss the problem of the transition of the twodimensional to the threedimensional order. However,
they are all mistaken when they assume that the two dimensionality of
the visual field order must be envisaged as given; this holds also for
my own Preidimens.1. Construction theory has shown us that this
twodimensional order, just as the threedimensional 0% must be considered derived; thus, the problem of its co~struction is posed. An
attempt at solving this problem has been discussed in $ 89 and has
been put forth as part of the constructiond system in 8 117 (cf. also
the other possibilities of a solution discussed in 8 9 2 ) .

It is still a question whether it is appropriate, or perhaps even necessary, to construct visual space before the ~ 0 n ~ t . r ~ ~oft ithe
0 n visual things
and their physical space. Psychologically, the three-dimensional, metric,
non-Euclidean (namely, spherical), visual Space forms an intermediate
step between the two-dimensional order of the visual field and the threedimensional Euclidean order of the outside world. However, it is probably appropriate for the constructional System to omit this step. F o r the
introduction of this step does not bring about a formal simplification of
construction, and the objects which are found o n this intermediate level
cannot be described as "real". According t o our earlier considerations,
such a simplifying deviation from the psychological order of the process

104 1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF W E WORLD

of cognition is permissible for the constructional system (cf. 5 100).
(Gerhards and Russell [see above], in their construction of the threedimensional space of visual things, likewise omit the intermediate level
of visual space.)

125. The Space-Time World
The points of n-dimensional, real-number space, we call world points;
they are n-tuples of numbers which serve as subjects loZof the following
assignment.lo3
To some world points, we shall assign colors (later on, also, quality
classes or classes of quality classes from other sense modalities); that is
to say, we shall establish a one-many relation between world points and
colors such that requirements 1-12 ( ยง 126) are fulfilled as far as
possible.
The dimension number n is not constructionally determined. We only
lay down that n should be the smallest number for which the desired
assignment can be carried out. From requirements 3 and 5, and the
empirical theorem (Th. 5 ( ยง 117) about the two dimensionality of the
visual field, it follows that: n 3; hence the dimension number of space
(n - 1 ) is at least equal to 2. From the (in realistic language) disap
pearance and reappearance of things in the visual field, it follows that
n 1 4 ; hence, the dimension number of space is at least 3. Finally, it
can be ascertained empirically that the construction can be executed for
n = 4; hence, the dimension number of the order of world points is to
be fixed at 4, that of space at 3.
The n numbers of each world point form an ordered set; they are
called its coordinates; the first number is called its time coordinate; the
other n - 1 numbers, its space coordinates. World points with the same
time coordinates are called simultaneous (absolute time system). A class
of world points which are all simultaneous with one another (i.e., a cross
section where t is constant) is called a space class.
Assume that a Euclidean metric on the basis of a Pythagorean determination of distances holds in the n-dimensional number space. Let the
expressions "straight line", "surface", "congruent", "angle", etc., be
defined in the customary way through relations of numbers. We can
then use the language of geometry since it is briefer and more intuitive.
It must be noted, however, that what we have in mind are always arithlo2
I*

Unterlage
Zuschreibung

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

(

183

metical relations between numbers, namely, between the coordinates of
the world points. For, space (not in the abstract-mathematical, but in
the actual, phenomenal sense), spatial position, spatial configurations,
have neither been introduced as basic entities, nor have they been defined; we are only just now constructing these objects. In the constructional system, the peculiar quality of spatiality, even though it is such
an essential feature of our experience of the outside world, no more
occurs as a quality than do the other qualities, namely, colors, tones,
emotions, etc. For the constructional system concerns itself only with
the structural and, in the case of space, only with the formal properties
of this structure. In doing so, the constructional system does not lose a
recognizable (that is, conceptually apprehensible) object, for, according
to the thesis of construction theory, the nonstructural cannot become the
object of a scientific statement. The space which we here construct, even
though we treat it only structurally, must nevertheless be well distinguished from the so-called "space" of pure abstract geometry, which
was constructed before the introduction of the basic relation (0 107).
We presuppose and apply this abstract space as already constructed in
order to be able to construct now space in the actual sense of the word,
namely, physical space. The former, strictly speaking unspatial, order lo'
is called "space" (or "abstract space") only because of its applicability
to physical space (cf. also 8 25).

126. The Assignment of Colors to World Points
The assignment of colors to the world points and the subsequent conStructions which are connected with this are carried out in such a way
that the following desiderata are satisfied as far as possible. They cannot
be precisely satisfied because of (in realistic language) hallucinations,
disturbances of the eye and the intervening medium, deformations and
Wmtegration of bodies, etc. In $ 127, we shall indicate in realistic lan@age the empirical states of affairs on which these individual desiderata
or rules of construction rest.
1. There is a series of prominent world points which we call the
Points of view.lo6 They form a continuous curve in such a way that each
Of the n - 1 space coordinates is a single-valued, continuous function
Of the time coordinate.
2. The straight lines which proceed from a given point of view and

1W

I

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

which form, with the negative direction of time, the angle y, we call the
lines of view.
3. y is constant and is very nearly equal to a right angle. Thus, if
a point of view has the time coordinate t,, then we can take as its lines
of view the straight lines of its space class (cross section t = t,) which
proceed from this point.
4. A one-to-one correspondence is established between elementary
experiences and some of the points of view in such a way that an experience which is later in time (Rs,, cf. 5 120) corresponds to a point of
view with a larger time coordinate.
5. If possible, we assign to each visual sensation ( ยง 116) of an elementary experience a line of view of the corresponding point of view
in such a way that (a) to sensations with proximate visual field places
(Proxpl, S 117) we assign lines of view which form only a small angle
with one another, and vice versa; and that (b) the pairs of lines of
view which are assigned to the visual sensations of two definite places in
merent elementary experiences all form the same angle, and conversely.
6. The color of a visual sensation is assigned to a world point of the
corresponding line of view. Points which are occupied in this way are
called "world points seen from the given point of view" or, in short,
seen color spots. For the choice of position of these points on their lines
of view, cf. 11.
7. Furthermore, taking into consideration the requirements 8-10,
we shall assign one color each to certain other world points. These world
points are called unseen color spots. Among the points of each of the
bundles of lines of view (according to 3, this means with very near approximation: among the points of each of the space classes), they form
at most a two-dimensional area, usually connected surfaces.
8. An unseen color spot may not be located on a line of view between
a point of view and a seen color spot.
9. The assignment of colors to unseen color spots according to 7 is
carried out in such a way that, as far as possible, each seen color spot
belongs to a world line. A world line is a continuous curve or curve segment such that precisely one world point belongs to each value of the
time coordinate within a given interval; the world point may be either
a seen or an unseen color spot. Within the interval, each space coordinate of the segment is a single-valued, continuous function of the time
coordinate.
10. According to 7, we have to assign a color to the unseen color
spots. Taking into account the colors of seen color spots, we make a pre-

OUTLINE O F A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

197

liminary choice of these colors in such a way that the color of the points
of a world line, considered as a function of time, shows a rate of change
which is as small as possible, i.e., if possible, remains constant.
11. Aside from the requirements of number 8, the following requirements determine the position of world lines, which in turn determine the
choice of position of the seen as well as the unseen color spots (according to 6) which lie upon their lines of view:
a. The world lines should have as little curvature as possible;
b. The angles between world lines and the direction of time
should be as small as possible;
c. Two world lines which run through one or more pairs of proximate seen color spots should, if possible, also be proximate elsewhere,
especially in the time intervals;
d. A set of world lines which form a spatially connected parallel
bundle during one or several time intervals should, if possible, do the
same at other times especially in the intervals between these intervals.
12. We shall later on supplement and correct the assignment; cf.
8 135 (supplementation of partially observed things or events through
analogy) and $ 144 (utilization of the observations of others). Nevertheless, the above-indicated requirements should always be fulfilled to
the largest possible extent.

127. Formulation of the Above Points in Realistic Language
To facilitate understanding, let us here indicate, in realistic language, the
states of affairs which lie at the bottom of the indicated requirements
which determine the assignment of colors to the world points.
1. The particular point in the interior of the head from which the
world seems to be seen has as its world line a continuous curve in the
space-time world. (The construction does not have to concern itself with
binocular vision, since the determination of depth has a sufficient and
more precise foundation elsewhere.)
2. The optical medium between the eye and the seen things can
generally be considered homogeneous. Under this assumption, the light
rays which impinge upon the eye form straight lines which enclose the
angle arc tg c with the negative direction of time (c designates the speed
of light).
3. The speed of light,
- c, is constant and very large. Thus, the light
rays are very nearly the straight lines of a momentary space.

198

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OP THE WORLD

4. Each visual perception is based upon an act of seeing from one
of the points of view.
5. a. Visual field places that lie next to one another always depict
only points of the outside world whose lines of view form a small angle
at the eye;
A given pair of visual field places always has the same visual
angle.
6. We conclude, from a visual sensation, that a point of the outside
which lies on the corresponding line of view has the color of the
visual sensation.
7. At my given time, there are many points of the outside world
which have a color, but are not seen at that time. These visible, but
unseen
me), world points are, for the most part, points on the
faces of bodies.
8. A visible, colored point of the outside world which is not seen by
me at a given time cannot at that time be located in front of a seen point.
9. We must assume, if there are no reasons to the contrary, that a
point of the outside world which has once been seen existed previously
and will exist afterward. Its locations form a continuous world line.
lo- We shall assume, if there is no reason to the contrary, that each
point of the outside world retains at the other times the same or as similar as possible a color as that with which it was seen at one time.
11. Assumptions concerning the motion of points, especially during
times when they are not seen, are to be made according to the following
rules :
a. Changes of velocity or direction of motion are not assumed to
be larger than is required by the observation; thus, if there are no reasons
to the contrary, we s h d assume the inertial motion (constancy of direction and velocity) ;
b- Velocity is not assumed to be larger than is required by the
observation; thus, if there are no reasons to the contrary, we shall assume
rest;
c. If we once, or repeatedly, observe two points to be next to one
another, we shall assume that they are next to one another also when
they are not seen;
d- If observations show several points to move as a connected
surface, then we assume the same behavior while no observations are
being made.
12- Inferences from the observed to the unobserved are at first scarce,
later on more abundant, for example, through re-cognition of a

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

199

seen thing ( $ 135), through an inference on the basis of a natural law
(8 135), or with the aid of observations of others (3 144).

128. The Visual Things
~ fin, a bundle of world lines which have been constructed according to
the given requirements ( 10 126, 1271, the pro~imityrelations remain
at least approximately the same during a protracted stretch (of time),
then the class of the corresponding world points is called a visual thing.
to the proximity relations, the metric relations also remain
If, in
constant, then the thing is called rigid. The intersection of a visual thing
with a space-class is called a state of the thing. (It is possible that it
might be more appropriate to construct first the states-of-things and
afterward the things as classes of corresponding ''genidenticay states~ f - t h i n gwe
~ ; shall not, at this point, investigate this question.)
T~~ world points of the same world line, we call genidentical; likewise, two states of the same King.
The class of world points of a thing which are seen from a given point
of view is called the "seen part" of the thing in the elementary experience to which the point of view corresponds. Since a point of view and
seen from it are very nearly simultaneous, we can,
on, take the seen part of a thing as a subclass of a

correspond to the seen points of a given thing are called the mpect of the
rice. Accordingly, the "seen parts7' of the thing, that
, parts of states of the thing, corresponds to aspects
REFERENCES. Concerning the concept of genidentity (this term
stems from Lewin), cf. Lewin [Zeitl.], Russell [External W.1 108 ff.
Cf. also 159 below, especially with respect to the necessary distinction between genidentity and identity.

There is a certain visual thing B which fulfills the conditions listed below.
These conditions and even an appropriate part of them f ~ amconstructional definite description of it; this visual thing is called my body.
1. Each state of B is very close to the corresponding point of view.
2. B,as all other visual things, forms an open surface when seen

200

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

a point of view. However, in contrast to all other visual things, every total
state of B also forms an open surface.
3. The world lines of B or connected areas of them are correlated with
the qualities (or classes of qualities) of a ccrtain sense class in such a
way that, upon contact with the world line of another visual thing or of
another part of B, another quality, called a tactile quality, occurs simultaneously in the experience in question; the so-constructed sense class is
called the tactile sense.
4. In a similar way, certain motions of B are correlated with the
qualities of another sense class; the sense class so described is called
kinesthetic sense.
5. On the basis of B, it will later on be possible to give a constructional description of the remaining sense classes ( 8 13 1) .
The given constructional determinations are founded upon the following empirical states of affairs (in realistic language) :
1. My body is always in the vicinity of my eye.
2. The surface of a body can never all be seen at the same time; thus,
m y part of the surface of a body which is seen at one time can never be
a closed surface. However, in the case of some bodies, the entire surface
is visible; thus, the visible surface is a closed surface. On the other hand,
in the case of my body, even the visible surface is an open surface, since
some parts of its surface, for example, the eye and the back, are not
visible.
3. The places of the surface of my body correspond to the qualities
(or location signs) of the tactile sense in such a way that we experience a
tactile sensation of a certain quality if a corresponding part of the skin
is touched by another body or by another part of my body.
4. The qualities of kinesthetic sensations correspond to certain types
of motions of my body.
5. The other senses are connected in a definite way with certain pa*
of my body, namely, with the sense organs.
REFERENCES. Because of its special epistemological significance*
the construction of "my body" has been investigated several times, for
example, by KaufTmann [Imman.] 39-54, Ziehen [Erkth.] 583 277,
445 ff., Driesch [Ordnungsl.] 354 6.

130. The Tactile-Visual Things
Earlier, we have assigned colors, i.e., classes of classes of visual qualities,
to some world points. We shall now do the same in a somewhat different

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

201

way with quality classes of the tactile sense, or rather, with classes of
such classes, namely those which coincide in their location sign. Earlier,
we discussed seen and unseen color spots; in like fashion, we now distinguish touch points. The position of the touched touch points can be determined more precisely than those of the seen color spots. For these touch
points touch the corresponding part of my body; hence, if we assume the
spatial position of my body as already determined, we do not have to
determine any distance or dimension of depth in this case. In most
cases, the touch points are also color spots, either seen or unseen. This
allows us in many cases to determine more precisely the position of the
world lines of the color spots. Sometimes the touch points are not color
spots; in these cases, they determine new world lines. In some cases, it
takes these world lines of mere touch points, together with the world
lines of color spots, in order to form the closed surface of a tactile-visual
thing. For example, this is the case for the most important tactile-visual
thing, namely, for my body. A large part of the surface of my body consists of world lines to which no color spots, but only touch points, correspond. Thus, my body becomes a completely closed thing only by taking
into account the qualities of the tactile sense.
REFERENCES. The problem of assigning tactile qualities to world
points to which only visual qualities (colors) were originally assigned
and, furthermore, the assignment of still other sensory qualities (5 133)
can also be formulated as the problem of the mutual correlation of the
various "sense spaces". This problem is discussed by Poincark [Wert],
Schlick [Raum und Zeit] 95 ff. (Method of Coincidences) and Jacoby
[Ontol.].

13 1 . Definite Description of the Remaining Senses
After my body has been constructed as a complete thing, namely, as a
tactile-visual thing, we can, if necessary, give definite descriptions of
various of its parts according to their shape or mutual position, since
spatial shape and position relations can be expressed with the aid of
the already constructed space coordinates. Thus, the sense organs, which,
for subsequent constructions, are the most important parts of my body,
can be constructionally described. The events taking place in these organs
are correlated in a certain way with certain senses. This enables us to
give definite descriptions of the individual senses. For example, after
spatial determinations have enabled us to distinguish ear, nose, tongue,
etc., from the other parts of the body, hearing, smelling, tasting, etc., can

902

1

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

TIZE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

be characterized, for example, by the fact that the quality classes of the
sense classes do not, as a rule, occur if the corresponding organ is blocked
off from its surroundings in a certain way.
In the case of the senses of pain, warmth, and cold, the organ, namely,
the skin, coincides with that of the tactile sense of which we have given
a d e f i t e description above ( 3 129). The constructional definite descrip
tion of these senses is possible in various ways, for example, through
correlation with the stimuli in question. The qualities of the sense of pain
frequently coincide with certain qualities of the tactile sense (namely,
those of great intensity). The senses of warmth and cold, for example,
are characterized by the fact that, under certain conditions, we frequently
run through a sequence of qualities of one of them, and afterward through
a sequence of qualities of the other; it is also true of them that most
qualities of the one sense exclude most qualities of the other for the same
part of the organ.
~ h u s in
, one way or another, we will finally be able to distinguish, or
construct, all the individual sense classes. As we have mentioned earlier
( $ 3 76, 85), we count among the sense classes also the domain of emotions. According to the explanation of the construction of Sense classes
which we have given above ( $ 85), it also holds that, if there are psychological objects (for example, volitions) outside of, and irreducible top
sensations and emotions, then the various types of such entities each form
one sense class. Definite descriptions of these further sense classes could
be given by correlating them with other sense classes (it holds, for example, for volitions, if they exist as a special kind of entity, that they could
be correlated with kinesthetic sensations), or by correlating them with
processes of the body (for example, correlation between emotions and
expressive motions).
After definite descriptions of the individual senses have been given, it
is possible to construct the various components of the qualities which are
represented in the quality classes. By a "component" We understand, for
example, pitch of a tone, loudness of a tone, timbre; hue, saturation*
brightness; generally: quality (in the narrower sense), with severa1
the senses also intensity, and, in the case of the senses of the skin, the
location sign; further, the (three?) dimensions of emotions, etc. The construction of these components, as classes of quality classes of the sense
becomes possible usually through a correlation wifh
modality in
the
those overt processes to which certain values o r certain changes
individual components frequently run parallel. Given the constructions
which we have already stated, such overt processes can, to a large extent'

(

203

already be constructionally formulated; further possibilities arise after
the construction of the perceptual things, which is given below ( $ 134).

132. The Domain of the Autopsychological
Earlier, we divided the elementary experiences into individual constituents, namely sensations, and also into general constituents, namely qualities ( $ 8 93, 116). In the constructions given so far, these constituents
have been divided into main areas (sense classes) and have been analyzed into components (especially qualities in the narrower sense, intensity, location sign). Within their main areas, they have been assigned a
qualitative and in part also a spatial order. InitiaIly, the elementary
experiences were brought into a preliminary time order (Rs,,, $ 120);
then, with the aid of the time coordinate of the point of view in the visual
world ( ยง 1261, they were placed into a complete time sequence.
The thus-ordered elementary experiences themselves, their constituents and components, and the more complex entities which are to be
constructed from these, form the domain of objects of which I am conscious, o r my consciousness. This domain forms the foundation of the
domain of the autopsychological. The latter results, if we introduce, in
addition, the "unconscious" objects. The construction of unconscious
objects on the basis of conscious objects is analogous to that of unseen
color spots on the basis of seen color spots ( Q 126). There we made a
assignment to world points, i.e., to coiirdinate quadruples; here
we make an assignment only to time points, i.e., to the individual values
Of the time coordinate. Through the earlier construction of the seen,
through the mediation of the points of view, elementary experie n e s are assigned to certain time points. Now we assign qualitj classes,
a'
as components of qualities and more complex structures formed
m &em1 to intermediate time points as well, even though no point of
w and no elementary experience corresponds to them. The methodotenets of construction thmry require that all of these "unconS" entities should be constructed from previously constructed, i.e.,
scious" objects. It is possible, however, that the unconscious entities
famed from the constituents of experiences and their components in
rent way from the conscious entities.
construction of unconscious objects has the following purpose
their aid we Can Construct the domain of autopsychological objects
domain in which a more thoroughgoing regularity of events holds
in the Subdomain of the conscious. The construction f o m has a

'

204

1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

certain resemblance to that of the physical world, especially to the procedure of supplementation through analogy, which we shall discuss below
(0 135). In both cases, there are tendencies toward preserving state
identity lo6 and process identity lo7 (thus, as it were, a psychological category of substance and a psychological category of causality). There is,
however, a remarkable feature of the domain of psychological objects
in which it differs from the physical world and especially the world of
physical science: in the former case, thoroughgoing regularity can be
obtained neither completely nor even in asymptotic approximation. Certain events (namely perceptions) occur always spontaneously and are
never the result of preceding ones.
We cannot here give a detailed description of the constructional object
forms. The construction (or cognitive synthesis) of the physical world
is very nearly completed in prescientific thought. On the other hand, the
construction of the autopsychological domain-setting aside certain insignificant beginnings-takes place only in science, indeed, in a science
which stands in a very early state of development, namely psychology.
Thus, it is understandable that the construction is far from complete. In
this science, there is no unanimity concerning the principles which it is
to follow. As concerns the majority of constructions, namely, the cornpletion of the context through introduction of the unconscious, there is
not even unanimity about the question of whether this supplementation
is to be carried out at all, whether it is appropriate and permissible. The
question of appropriateness must be decided by psychological research
itself and will probably be decided in the near future. On the other hand,
the much-debated question concerning the methodological (logical or
epistemological) permissibility of the construction of the unconscious
must, on the basis of construction theory, certainly be answered in the
affirmative. For, the construction of the unconscious is completely analogous to the construction of unseen color spots from seen color spots; yet
the permissibility of the latter construction is never denied or even questioned. Also, on the basis of this analogy, one can easily see that the
construction of such supplemented domains, which contain among other
things also objects which do not immediately occur in experiences, does
not consist in anything but an appropriate reorganization of the objects
which occur immediately. But perhaps the opposition to the concept of
unconscious psychological events is directed less toward the
of such objects than against the assertion of their reality. However, even
1"

Zustandsgleichheit

lo7 Ablaufsgleichhcit

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 205

this objection cannot very well be maintained in view of the analogy with
the unseen color spots and all the unperceived points of the perceptual
world. (Later on, we shall concern ourselves more closely with the
problem of reality, 8 170 ff.)
We speak of "physical things" and their "states". In a similar way, it
is customary to envisage the autopsychological entities which correspond
to an individual time point-be it an elementary experience with its
(quasi) constituents, or an experience supplemented by subconscious
entities, or subconscious entities alone-as "states" of a persisting bearer,
of a psychological thing, as it were. From the analogy of this cognitive
synthesis to that of the physical things, it follows that this bearer, which
we do not commonly call "psychological thing", but the self or my mind,
must be constructed as a class of autopsychological states. It is of especia1 importance in this connection to keep in mind that a class is not the
collection of its elements (5 37), but a quasi object which allows us to
make statements about that which the elements have in common. The
obvious objection to this constructional definition is unfounded as long
as we keep this in mind. The constructional definition is to reflect nothing
but the structural, the ordered, in the self, which alone can be rationally
apprehended. On the other hand, the question whether, at the bottom
of all autopsychological objects, there lies the "self" as a final unresolvable unity, is not a question of order, but a question of essence; thus, to
pose and answer this question is not the task of the constructional systern, but of metaphysics (cf. 8 163).

133. The Assignment of Other Sense Qualities
So far, we have assigned only the qualities of the visual sense and of the

tactile sense to certain world points (0 0 126, 130). Since individual
descriptions of the remaining senses are now also available ( 5 131) , we
can proceed to assign their qualities or classes of their qualities to world
pints. Taking into account the cognitive synthesis as it actually occurs,
the constructional system will not undertake this assignment with all
qualities, but only with those where the assignment can be carried out
in an appropriate way. This means that, for example, the assignment to
individual world points of a (visual) world line does not result in too
many changes of the assigned qualities in the course of time. For exampie, for the qualities of the sense of taste, an assignment is possible; if
we assign the quality "sweet" to a certain state of a certain piece of
Sugar, then the assignment to "tasted points" can be extended to "un-

206

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

tasted points" of the world Lines (in analogy to the seen and unseen
points, 8 126). This procedure will not often lead to contradictions
through the assignment of different taste qualities to points of the same
world line. An assignment for the qualities of the olfactory sense is
similarly successful. In the case of the auditory sense, the assignment is
not quite so simple. If we have once heard a tone in a thing, then we
cannot simply continue to assign this tone to it permanently, without
arriving at frequent contradictions. The qualities of certain other senses,
for example, the sense of balance, the kinesthetic sense, the sensations
in organs, can be assigned to certain world lines or bundles of world
lines, i.e., to visual things, only with great difficulty or perhaps not at all.
However, there is no clear boundary line between assignable and nonassignable sense qualities. Let us consider, for example, the emotions and
perhaps also the volitions. (We consider the volitions as an independent
quality domain, i.e., as a "sense" only for the sake of argument, without
wishing to prejudge the necessity, or even possibility, of such a step; cf.
8 85.) We do not frequently assign qualities of emotions or volitions as
properties to things in the outside world. This is due to the scientific
orientation of our thinking, which affects us in this way, even outside of
science, in daily life. We must assume, however, that to decline this
assignment is only the result of a process of abstraction and does not
hold from the outset. In the uncritical conception of a child, the apple
does not only taste "sourish", but also "delicious" or even "like more".
This seems to mean that, not only a taste quality, but also an emotion
quality and even a volition quality is assigned to it. In a similar way, a
woods is "melancholy", a letter "painful", a dress "arrogant". (It must
be carefully noted that these objects are not meant as subjects on the
basis of empathy, but as objects with the properties in question.) It must
be admitted that these assignments are completely justified, for, just as
we may call sugar "sweet", since it produces a taste sensation of an
appropriate quality, a melody may be called "gay", a letter "painful",
an act "outrageous", since these objects produce the appropriate emotions. Furthermore, an apple looks "begging for a bite", a face looks
"pushing for a punch", a noise is "to run away from", since these objects
cause volitions of the appropriate kind. The assignment of qualities of
emotion and volition is generally dropped as conceptual thinking develops. The reason for this perhaps does not lie so much in pronounced
temporal variations of these qualities in the same thing-for these variations are here frequently less pronounced than they are, for example,
with the sense of warmth, the sense of cold, and the olfactory sense;

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

207

rather, these assignments are given up because of contradictions which
result later on (when the intersubjective world is constructed) between
the assignments which are made by the various subjects. This would
seem to justify the assumption that emotions (and volitions, if they are
an independent domain) actually stand on the same level as sensations
(in the narrower, customary sense). Nevertheless, they are not included
among the qualities which are assigned to the outside world; they are
envisaged as belonging in a certain way to the "inward" man. The only
reason for this seems to be that these qualities, even if assigned to the
same object, show a higher degree of variation between several subjects
than the sensations in the narrower sense. However, the rejection of
these qualities for the construction of perceptual things by no m3ans
holds throughout; above, we have mentioned the thinking of the child,
and similar remarks can frequently be made about the world of poetry.
That we are here concerned only with differences in degree becomes
obvious through the fact that, in the course of scientific development,
the qualities of taste and of odor are eventually no longer assigned, and
the same holds finally even for the qualities of the tactile and the visual
sense. This rejection is a necessary consequence of the insight that the
assignment, even of the qualities of these sense modalities varies from
subject to subject and thus cannot be carried out in a unique and consistent way. In other words, the conceptual formation (and thus also
the construction which follows it) of the perceptual world has only provisional validity. In the progress of knowledge (and of construction) it
must give way to the strictly unambiguous but completely quality-free
world of physics (cf. 8 136.)

134. Perceptual Things
Almost without exception, it is points of the tactile-visual things to
which the qualities of the remaining senses are assigned in the indicated
way. After this assignment we call these things perceptual things. The
entire space-time world, with the assignment of sense qualities to the
individual world points, we call the perceptual world.
Earlier we were able to use spatial relations of shape and position to
furnish definite descriptions of the individual parts of my body, taken as
visual things ( 3 13 1) ; now we can produce such descriptions on a large
scale for individual objects as kinds of objects taken as perceptual things.
On this can then be based constructional definite descriptions of individual colors, individual odors, etc. (e.g., grcen as the color of foliage,

208

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

etc.). As we can see from etymological considerations, this construction
is analogous to the actual formation of concepts and of words for the
individual sensation qualities. The construction of the autopsychological
domain is here supplemented by higher-level constructions. Such supplementations will occur in various other places as well, but we shall not
pay any further attention to them.

135. Completion of the Perceptual World through Analogy

,ap
59

Assume that, for large parts of two space-time regions, the assignment
of sense qualities is completely or very nearly identical, while the remaining area of one of the space-time regions shows assignments for points
where no qualities of the sense in question are assigned to the conespending points of the other area. In this case, we undertake analogous
assignments in the latter area.
The remaining area may be part of the larger region in a temporal or
in a spatial sense. Depending upon which of the two is the case, the
application of the construction procedure of assignment by analogy
would seem to be quite different in the two cases. In the first case, the
import of the procedure can be intuitively formulated in the following
way (in realistic language) : if a temporally large part of a known process
is repeated in equal o r similar ways while it remains unobserved for the
remainder of the time, then we assume (if there are no reasons to
the contrary) that, during the time when no observations are made, the
second process continues in a way analogous to the first, or, more briefly,
the processes are subject to mutual analogy. In the second case, i.e., in
the case of completion in a spatial direction, the import of the procedure
can be formulated thus (in realistic language): if a spatial part of a
previously perceived thing is perceived again in the same or in similar
ways, while the remaining spatial area remains unobserved, then we
assume (if there are no reasons to the contrary) that the unobserved
spatial part contains part of a thing which is analogous to the corresponding part of the first thing; or, more briefly, the things are subject to
mutual analogy.
Both ways of applying this procedure have occurred earlier when we
were concerned with supplementing the seen color spots with unseen
color spots so as to arrive at world lines (the first kind in 5 126, rules
10, l l, c, d; the second kind in rule 11, c, d ) , similarly, in the supplementation of touched touch points through untouched touch points
(0 130).

1

209

In a sense, the first kind of application of the assignment by analogy
can be envisaged as the application of a postulate o f causality, the second
as the application of a postulate o f substance, or, to put it the other way
around, the two categories o f causality and substance amount to the
application of the same analogy construction to different coordinates.
Even if we consider the color spots alone, the application of this procedure brings the assignments very considerably closer to completion.
Further supplementations result from the mutual support of the various
senses. Through such supplementations. new things and regularities become known,-or old on% become better know; with the aid of this
infomation, further supplementations become possible. Thus, we find
mutual advancement between the recognition of general laws which hold
for things and processes on one hand, and the supplementation of the
assignment of qualities to points in the perceptual world on the other.

136. The World of Physics
The perceptual world is constructed through the assignment of sense
qualities; from it we must distinguish the world of physics, where physi&state magnitudes 108 are assigned to the points of the four-dimensional
number space. This construction has the purpose of formulating a domain which is determined through mathematically expressible laws. They
are to be mathematically expressible in order to allow us to calculate
certain elements from those other elements which determine them. Furthemore, the necessity of constructing the world of physics rests on the
circumstance that only this world, but not the perceptual world (cf.
1 132, concIusion), can be made intersubjective in an unequivocal, consistent manner ( $ $ 146-1 49 1.
It is not antecedently obvious that physics, if it wants to establish a
domain of thoroughgoing regularity, has to eliminate all qualities and
replace them by numbers. The opposition (which Goethe, for example,
maintained against Newton in the polemical part of his Farbenlehre)
asserts that one has to remain within the domain of the sense qualities
and that one must ascertain the regularities which hold between them.
This would mean that we would have to find the regularities in the domain which we called the perceptual world. Of course, laws like the
natural laws of physics do not hold in this domain. One can show, however, that there must be regularities of some sort if the construction of a
World of physics, which is governed by regularities, is to be possible at
L___

'08phy~ikali~che
Zustandsgrossen

210

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

all. However, the regularities within the perceptual world are oi a much
more complicated nature than the laws of physics. At the moment, we
cannot concern ourselves with these problems. There is a much more
simple way to arrive at a domain of thoroughgoing regularity and calculability, and that is to construct the world of physics as a pure world of
numbers.
The indicated purpose of this construction does not unambiguously
determine which physical-state magnitudes must be chosen for the construction of the world of physics; at least, this is not clear at the present
state of physical knowledge. There are various choices. However, as far
as empirical evidence is concerned, the various resulting systems of
physics have the same value. It is probable that eventually a clear decision will be made (which will be based upon empirical evidence but
which will be guided by methodological principles, for example, the
principle of greatest possible simplicity).
The formulation of the laws of nature depends upon the choice of
state magnitudes and upon the system of physics. Nevertheless, the kind
and degree of determination which is provided through the natural laws
is empirically fixed and does not depend upon the system. That is to say,
the assignment of all state magnitudes to all world points is determined
by the assignment of the state magnitudes to the points of a threedimensional cross section at right angles to the first coordinate (which
corresponds to time).
The construction of the physical world, aside from the regularity to
which it is to lead, is essentially determined through a special relation
which holds between it and the perceptual world; this relation we want
to call physicoqualitative correlation. To begin with, the world points of
physics are in a one-to-one correspondence to the world points of the
perceptual world. (Nevertheless, the metric of the physical world can be
different from that of the perceptual world; for example, it could be the
non-Euclidean metric which is required by the general theory of relativity.) Then there exists a one-many relation between the qualities and
the state magnitudes in such a way that, if there is an assignment of
physical-state magnitudes of any (purely numerical) structure to a
physical l0"oint in its neighborhood, then the quality which is correlated
with this structure is always assigned to the correlated world point of the
perceptual world or, at least, it can be assigned without contradiction.
However, in the opposite direction, the correlation is not unique; the
assignment of a quality to a world point in the perceptual world does not
l"

physikalisch

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 211

determine which structure of state magnitudes is to be assigned to the
neighborhood of the corresponding physical world point of the world
of physics; the assignment of this quality merely determines a class to
which this structure must belong. It is clear that the physico-qualitative
correlation cannot be free from the imprecision which attaches to the
world generally.
-perceptual
REFERENCES. Concerning the problem of deciding between the
possible systems of physics, cf. Carnap [Aufg. d. Phys.]; this article
also concerns itself in more detail with the physico-qualitative correlation. About kind and degree of determination of the world of physics,
cf. Carnap [Dreidimens.]. That the world of physics is completely free
from sense qualities is shown by Schlick [Raum and Zeit] 93 f. and
Carnap [Phys. Begr.]; the latter also gives reasons for the transition
from the qualitative perceptual world to the quantitative physical world
(p. 51 ff.).

137. Biological Objects; Man
After the world of physics has been constructed, it is possible to give a
definite description of each individual event and each thing that belongs
to the world. This can be accornplishcd through indication of p!ace and
time or through the relation to other events and things or through properties based on the assignments. We have already assumed earlier that
definite descriptions of the individual sense organs of my body are given
( $ 131); it is now also possible to give a constructional definite description of all the other parts and events of my body; furthermore, all other
individual physical things, their parts, and events in connection with
them. Accordingly, these physical things can be placed into classes or
into entire systems of classes of various levels according to the properties in which they agree. In this way we obtain, for example, the inorganic and organic substances, furthermore, the inorganic and organic
individual objects as well as the entire system of organisms, of plants,
and of animals, as well as the system of artifacts. In such a way, the
entire domain of physical objects is constructable.
Organisms are characterized through special properties of the events
which take place with them or through certain "faculties" which are to
be constructed on the basis of these events, for example, metabolism,
procreation, regulation, etc. It is not necessary at this point to discuss
these identifying properties in more detail. The only important thing is
that they are physical properties, i.e., properties which we can assume

aia I

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

to be constructed after the construction of the world of physics. The
organisms with their essential properties and relations and events which
are peculiar to organisms are called biological objects.
One can show empirically that "my body", a thing which we constructed at first as a visual thing ( $ 129) and which we have then, through
further assignments, placed in the perceptual world, belongs to the organisms. The class of men is constructed as a class of the biological classification of organisms, to which my body belongs. A constructional definite
description of this class is given by indicating the degree to which its
elements are to agree with my body in size, figure, motions, and other
events. Outside of the thing which is called "my body", there are "other
men" (as physical things) who belong to this class. This class forms an
object type which is of especial importance for the constructional system. Starting from it, we shall construct the heteropsychological domain
( $ 140) and thus all higher objects.

1 3 8 . The Expression Relation
The construction of my body, its parts, its motions, and the other events
which are connected with it, has already been discussed ( $ $ 129, 131,
137). It is relatively unimportant whether we here mean by "my body"
the mere tactile-visual thing, to which we originally gave this name, or
the corresponding physical thing, because the events which we need for
further constructions can be satisfactorily identified through tactile and
visual qualities.
For the subsequent construction of the heteropsychological (5 140),
the expression relation is of fundamental importance. As pointed out
earlier ( $ 19), by this is meant the relation between expressive motions,
i.e., facial expressions, gestures, bodily motions, even organic processes,
on the one hand, and the simultaneous psychological events which are
"expressed" through them, on the other. This explanation is not meant to
be the constructional definition of the expression relation, since it would
clearly be circular. It is really meant to refer to already known facts in
order to provide a clearer understanding of the word. The construction of
the expression relation, on the other hand, consists in the following: to a
class of autopsychological events which frequently occur simultaneously
with certain recognizable physical events of my body, we correlate the
class of these physical events as "expression".
The construction of the heteropsychological could also be based upon
the psychophysical relation ( 5 5 19, 21 ), instead of the expression rela-

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

213

tion, if only this relation were somewhat better known. In this case, the
relation would have to be constructed in the following way: to a class
of autopsychological events which frequently occur simultaneously with
certain physical events of my central nervous system, the class of these
physical events is "psychophysically" correlated.

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

CHAPTER

1

215

marize, in the form of theses, all those points which may be asserted
after completion of the exposition of the constructional system ( $ 156).
These theses are thus different from the content of the system itself,
which was to be no more than an example.

THE UPPER LEVELS:
HETEROPSYCHOLOGICAL AND
CULTURAL OBJECTS

139. About the Presentation of Subsequent Constructional Levels
For the subsequent levels of the constructional system, we cannot do
more than give outlines showing the possibility of a construction of the
object in question on the basis of preceding constructions.
To begin with, we shall construct the heteropsychological objects
(0 140) on the basis of "other persons", which are already constructed
as physical things (0 137), and with the aid of the expression relation
( $ 138). Furthermore, certain events in the other persons are envisaged
as "productions of signs". With their aid, we shall construct the world
of the other ( $ $ 141-145). There exists a certain correspondence between the world which we have constructed up to this point, namely,
"my world", and this "world of the other". Upon this correspondence
the construction of the intersubjective world is based ( $ $ 146-149).
Finally, it is possible, on the basis of the (auto- or hetero-) psychological
objects, to construct the objects of the highest level, namely, the cultural
objects ( 0 150 f.) and values ( $ 152). After having discussed these
constructions, we shall then consider the problem of the elimination of
the basic relation(s) as the only remaining aspect of the constructional
system that is not purely formal ($0 153-155). Finally, we shall sum-

-,

140. The Domain of the Heteropsychological
Earlier ( $ 137), we have constructed "other persons" as those organisms which are similar to my body in certain ways. Thus, they have been
constructed as physical things. Now we shall undertake the construction
of the psychological aspects of other persons, namely, the heteropsychological. This construction consists in the following: on the basis of physical events in another person and with the aid of the expression relation,
which has been constructed earlier (0 138), we assign psychological
events to this person. Aside from the expression relation, we shall also
utilize the "production of signs", i.e., information that the other person
gives me ( $ 3 141-144). Here we arrive at two very important points;
the construction of the heteropsychological can be an assignment only
to the body of the other, not to his mind, which, after all, cannot be
constructed in any other way than through this assignment; thus, constructionally, the other mind does not even exist before this assignment
is carried out. Secondly, the assigned psychological events are autopsychological events for the very same reason: the only psychological entities which have been constructed up to this point are autopsychological
entities, and no other can be constructed prior to this assignment; there
is no possibility of constructing non-autopsychological entities other than
with the aid of precisely this assignment.
We shall supplement this assignment in order to obtain a more or less
complete experience sequence of the other person by using two types of
law, both of which are derived from elementary experiences, namely,
state laws 110 (i.e., that constituents of elementary experiences of type a
are generally simultaneous with others of type b ) and process laws 111
(i.e., that experiences, or constituents of experiences or sequences of
them, of type a are generally succeeded by others of type b ) . Thus, the
entire experience sequence o f the other person consists of nothing but
a rearrangement of my own experiences and their constituents. It must
be noted, however, that we can construct experiences for the other person
Which do not correspond to any of my own experiences, but the constitu-

'lo

'I1

Zustandsgesetsa
Ablaufsgesetze

216

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

ents of such experiences of the other person must occur as constituents
of my own experiences, for (in constructional language) there is nothing
to be assigned except the elementary experiences and what is constructed
from them, i.e., their quasi constituents (in the widest sense, including
components, etc.); (in realistic language) : as I observe expressive events
in another person, I cannot infer from them something that is unknown
to me in kind.
We have pointed out ( $ 132) that my experiences or conscious.events
are supplemented through the insertion of unconscious events so as to
form the complete autopsychological domain; this domain shows fairly
extensive, though not altogether autonomous, regularity. In precisely
analogous fashion, we now supplement the experience sequence or the
consciousness of the other with unconscious events of the other so as
to arrive at the complete domain of the psychological states of the other.
In so doing we assume the same determining laws as in the supplementation which produced the autopsychological domain. The thus constructed
"psychological states of the other", when taken as a class, may be called
the mind of the other in analogy to "my mind". The general domain of
the heteropsychological embraces all psychological events of all other
persons who (i.e., whose bodies) occur as physical things in the already
constructed world of physics.
From the indicated type of construction for the heteropsychological
domain, it follows that there can be no heteropsychological phenomena
without a body, for (in constructional language) : the heteropsychological
can be constructed only through the mediation of a body; in particular,
of a body where certain events ("expressive events") occur which are
similar to those of my body; (in realistic language) : if heteropsychological objects were not connected with a body through which they
express themselves, they would be in principle unrecognizable and
thus could not become the objects of scientific statements. (We shall not
here concern ourselves with the problem of telepathy; a closer investigation would show that even telepathic knowledge of the heteropsychological needs the mediation of a body.)
If we were to presuppose sufficient (but presently unavailable) knowledge of brain physiology (such that the correlation problem of the psychophysical relation would be solved, cf. ยง 21), then the psychological
states of another person could be more precisely and more completely
constructed with the aid of the psychophysical relation than with the
aid of the expression relation (together with the production of signs).
If the brain events of the other person were completely constructed to

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

217

their last detail as parts of the world of physics, then it would be possible
to construct from them, at the same time, the conscious as well as the
unconscious; hence, the entire range of the psychological states of the
other person. The just-indicated conclusions follow from this type of
construction also.
REFERENCES. Considering its great importance for the construction of the knowable world, the problem of the construction of the
heteropsychological is not very often posed as a problem; attempts at
its solution are even more rare. Actually, we have to mention only the
following: Kauffmann [Imman.] 106-121; Dingler [Naturphil.] 140ff.;
Driesch [Ordnungsl.] 371 ff. (with bibliography); Ziehen [Erkth.] 277 ff.;
Becher [Geisteswiss.] 119 ff., 285 ff.; Jacoby [Ontol.] 307 ff. In these
and other investigations of this kind (with the exception of Kauffmann
and Dingler), the heteropsychological is generally inferred, rather than
constructed. This inference amounts to a violation of the construction
principle of Russell (see the motto preceding ยง 1, and 5 3). Russell
himself does not apply his principle to this particular problem. For
detailed discussions of the epistemological reducibility of the heteropsychological to the physical, see Carnap [Realismus].
About the reduction by behaviorism, not only of the heteropsychological, but of all psychological phenomena to physical phenomena,
cf. 159.

141. The Production of Signs
Other persons, considered as physical things, exhibit certain physical
manifestations other than expressive events which are of especial importance for the increase of knowledge and hence for the completion of the
constructional system. These are the sign-giving manifestations, especially spoken and written words; we call them sign productions. They
make possible a broadening of the constructional system, an increase in
the number of constructable objects of almost all kinds.
Earlier, we have discussed the sign relation and have emphasized its
Werence from the expression relation ( 3 19). One of its partial relations is the relation between "sign production" and the signified. The
construction of this relation is more difficult than any of the constructions
which we have hitherto undertaken. One can of course produce rules
for how the meaning of sounds of a foreign language can be inferred by
a comparison of these sounds with processes in the speaker. However, it
is not possible to formulate these rules in such a way that the first occurrence of a sound will always allow us to infer its meaning. One can only

218

1

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM i 210

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

indicate how one could make conjectures and how these conjectures,
after the sounds have occurred a number of times, can be either rejected
or better confirmed until they become certainties.
In order to arrive at a constructional definition of the relation of sign
production, one would have to translate such rules (for the recognition
of the meaning of a sign) into the constructional language. Consequently,
this definition, too, would take on a very complicated form. To begin
with, we would have to stipulate that a physical event in another person
is considered a sign production if the following construction can be completely carried out for that event. An object is considered the designaturn
of a sign production of a certain person if there is a proccdure which
assigns the greatest weight to it in relation to that sign production. The
meaning of the sign production is considered the more safely ascertained,
the more the weight of the object in question surpasses the weight of the
other objects for the same sign production. We can here only barely hint
at the rules for the assignment of weights to the various objects for a
given sign production.
The rules would say, for example, that the weight which is assigned
to a physical thing, relative to a sign production, rises if the thing is
close to the body of the sign-giver at the time of the sign production;
furthermore, if it stands in certain relations (namely, the stimulus relations) to the sense organs of the sign-giver, or else if it was in the
proximity of the sign-giver or stood in the stimulus relation to his sense
organs, not at the time of the sign production, but a short time before.
Furthermore, the weight rises if the thing is in motion or if it changes
its state of motion or if it undergoes a discontinuous process or if it
contrasts very strongly in its physical properties with its surroundings,
etc. Let this simple indication suffice to show that such rules are possible.
According to the indicated procedure, sign production is, to begin with,
related to the physical. Unlike the sample rules, our rules must eventually assign weights, not only to physical bodies, but to physical objects
of all kinds (events, states, properties, relations, etc.). Furthermore,
and still relative to a given sign production, we shall use similar rules
to assign weights to the psychological objects of the sign-giver; they
are again objects of various kinds (experiences, constituents, components, etc.). Eventually, weights will also be assigned to the psychological objects of other persons, including the self. After we have later on
carried out still higher-level constructions, the objects which we shall
then introduce will also have weights assigned to them, according to the
closer or more remote connection between the object in question and
the sign-giver.

The most important assignment of weights to objects, albeit the most
difficult one, arises when (in realistic language) a word is understood
through its context. Relative to a given word, which occurs in a sentence,
those objects are to be assigned increased weight, which stand in a close
relation to the objects designated by the other words of the sentence
(they could be of the same object type, they could be in spatial or temporal proximity, they could coincide in certain properties or be connected
through a certain event, etc.). If the meaning of the other word has not
been sufficiently ascertained, we must for each word take several objects
into account, depending on their weight.

142. Reports of Other Persons
Taking into consideration other words for the interpretation of a given
word is only the most primitive form of considering the context. A much
more fruitful form follows from the circumstance that words form sentences and that sentences designate states of affairs. A sign production
which forms an entire sentence, i.e., which designates a state of aflairs,
we call a report.l12 The reporting relation (between a report and its
state of affairs) is to be constructed together with the sign production
relation (between a word and the designated object), since the two constructions relate to, and support, one another. However, the construction
of the reporting relation is still more complicated than the construction
of the sign production relation for words, especially since the Werent
possible sentence forms must be taken into consideration.
EXAMPLE. In order to indicate the rough form of this construction,
let us concern ourselves with a rather simple sentence form, namely,
with sentences which consist of three words, which designate a referent,
a relation and a relatum (example: "Karl hits Fritz"). In such a
case, the constructional definition of the reporting relation would contain
roughly the following elements: the meaning of a report is that
particular state of affairs which has the greatest total weight relative
to that report. The total weight is a function (perhaps the product)
of individual weight factors of the state of affairs relative to the
given report. For the determination of these factors, definite rules
would have to be devised, which could be like or similar to the following: A state of affairs is related to two objects (in the example, Karl
and Fritz) and a relation which holds between them (hitting). The first
factor for the total weight of a given state of affairs relative to a given
report is the weight of the first object of the state of affairs (to be determined according to the rules of ยง 141), relative to the fist word of
_C__

'lo

Angabe

220

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

the report ("Karl"); the second factor is the weight of the relation
of the state of affairs relative to the second word of the report
("hits"); the third factor is the weight of the third object of the state
of affairs, relative to the thud word of the report ("Fritz"). A fourth
factor, which carries much more weight than the three just-mentioned
ones, could perhaps be determined in the following way. It is largest
when the state of affairs obtains (i.e., if the relation in question holds
between the two objects; in the example, if Karl really hits Fritz); it is
smaller when it is not known whether or not the state of atfaus obtains;
still smaller, if the state of affairs does not obtain, even though the first
object belongs to the domain and the second to the converse domain
of the relation; it is still smaller if only one of these two conditions is
fulfilled and still smaller if both of them remain unfumed, but if the
objects at least belong to the object type or at least to the sphere of
the domain or the converse domain, etc.
The meaning of a report is secure to the extent to which the total
weight of a state of affairs which is determined according to rules of the
indicated kind surpasses the total weights of the remaining states of
affairs. The more or less secure correlations which are thus established
for the reporting relation can now in turn be used for the sign production relation for words, namely, for the three words of the report. Now,
if we have secured a pair consisting of a report and a state of affairs
which stand to one another in the reporting relation, then an object is
assigned greater weight relative to a word if word and object occur in
corresponding positions in the report and in the state of affairs, respectively. The weight factor which is thus assigned to an object is of especial
importance for the determination of its weight. This is a reflection of the
special value of the "context" for the determination of the meaning of
a word.

143. Intuitive Understanding and Functional Dependency
We have said earlier ( 8 100) that the construction does not represent
the actual process of cognition in its concrete manifestations, but that it
is intended to give a rational reconstruction of the formal structure of
this process. This viewpoint allows and even requires deviations of the
construction from the actual process of cognition. In the last-mentioned
cases, namely, in the constructional utilization of expressive motions, of
sign productions, and of reports, this deviation is especially great. A
child, in learning to understand the meaning of spoken words and sentences, proceeds in an associative, intuitive fashion and not (or at least

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

221

only to a very inconsiderable degree) through ratiocination. To a still
greater degree, the understanding of the expressive motions of another
person is restricted to the intuitive procedure. It is somewhat different
with a sentence. After we have already understood a sentence, we can
still remember its individual parts and infer the meaning of the entire
sentence from the meanings of the parts and thus provide a rational
check for the intuitive understanding. On the other hand, after we have
understood the facial expressions of another person, it is not possible in
most cases to recollect precisely the individual expressions of the other;
the impressions of purely physical events are quite fleeting, so that essentially there remains only the recollection of the apprehended meaning.
Now, there is a certain dependency between sign production and expressive motion, on the one hand, and the designated or expressed
meaning, on the other; it is this dependency which is to be expressed in
the construction. This dependency holds in every case, whether the
understanding of an utterance is intuitive or rational. To begin with,
the dependency consists in the fact that all apprehensions of heteropsychological phenomena depend upon the mediation of a sign production
or an expressive motion. More than that, the entire nature of the apprehensible or the apprehended content is dependent upon the nature of
the mediating utterance. In other words, the heteropsychological is (even
intuitively) apprehensible only as the meaning of an utterance (of an
expressive motion or a sign production). The meaning of an utterance
is a unique function of the physical properties of the utterance ("function" in the mathematical, not in the psychological, sense). Since the
construction states this function, the course of the process of cognition
is not misrepresented by the construction (it is not falsely given out as
a rational-discursive, rather than an intuitive process) ; the construction
does not even contain a fiction to the effect that the process is rational
rather than intuitive. (The latter is the case only in the language of fictitious constructive operations, which is added as an aid to understanding.)
The construction itself does not indicate any process at all, but only the
above-mentioned logical function.
These remarks hold, beyond the present problem, quite generally for
all constructions. For the sake of brevity and intuitive obviousness, we
have, in this chapter (IV, C), used the realistic language most of the
time. Thus, the present context makes it especially important to note
that the constructions themselves (which are not here given) have the
neutral character of logical functions even with the objects which are
presently under discussion.

222

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

REFERENCES. About the necessity of giving an cpistemologicallogical "justification" or legitimization of the recognition of the heteropsychological, which in reality takes place through empathy or "apperceptive supplementation" (B. Erdmann), cf. Becher [Geisteswiss.] 285 ff.
For a more detailed anaylsis of the sense of the epistemological reduction in general and especially of the reduction of the hetcropsychological
to the physical, see Carnap [Realismus].

144. T h e Utilization of Reports o f Other Persons
Zn the process of cognition, and thus also in the constructional system,
we make two different kinds of use of the reports of other persons. TO
begin with, a report (if it is reliable) informs me about a state of affairs,
but, secondly, I also find out that this state of affairs is known to the

other.
Let us consider, to begin with, the utilization of the content of reports.
Before a report is utilized, its reliability must be tested. This is done,
on the one hand, through a comparison with already more or less wellestablished states of affairs and relational laws between them and, on
the other hand, by taking into consideration the trustworthiness of the
author of the report, the criteria for which are discovered empirically
and gradually. We shall not dwell upon the test of trustworthiness and
shall presuppose that a selection of the rcliable reports has already
been made.
It is quite obvious that the utilization of the contents of reports makes
for an extraordinary enrichment of the possibilities of construction. More
precisely, the number of constructable objects in the various domains is
increased many times. Only the domain of the autopsychological allows
very little enlargement. Not so with the ~hysicaldomain, and the construction of the domains of the heteropsychological and finally of the
cultural rest almost entirely on the utilization of reports. There is no
to concern ourselves at this point with the details of this.
the
~ e ust again focus our attention on the fact that, on no level
the
constructional system, hence not even through the utilization
reports of other persons, is something fundamentally new introduced
into the system, but that what we have here is only a reorganization
new order
(albeit a very complicated one) of the given elements.
which eventuates from this reorganization is not determined thrOu@
something that lies outside of the given, but again only through the given
itself or, more precisely, through the inventory of the basic relation(s)'
~ h u s this
, u&ation of reports does not lead US to abandon the

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 323

psychological basis upon which the entire constructional system is
founded. Nevertheless, we do not construct other persons as mere machines, but with all the contents of their experiences, to the extent to
which they are (in realistic language) recognizable. After all, it was the
thesis of construction theory that the constructional system, in spite of
its autopsychological basis, would be in a position to express all legitimate statements, more precisely, all statements which can be considered
valid in an empirical science or which can be posed as questions. (This
does not include the statements of metaphysics.)

145. T h e World o f the Other
The experiences of a given other person M (who has been constructed
as a physical thing, according to $ 137) are constructed according to
the last-described procedure, i.e., with the aid of the expression relation
and the reporting relation. It is not possible to construct these experia c e s either as numerous or as variegated as my own experiences, the
elementary experiences, are given to me. Nevertheless, in spite of this
incompleteness, we can apply the same construction forms to them which
we have applied to elementary experiences from the beginning of the
constructional system. More precisely, the constructional steps which
were carried out earlier with the basic relation Rs are now carrried out
with the analogous relation RsY, which holds between M's experiences.
Thus, we formulate new constructional definitions by transforming the
already available constructional definitions through a substitution of Rs,
for RS and through attaching an appropriate subscript (indicating M) to
the defined symbols (e.g., colorM,qual,, etc.). Thus, we construct "Ms
objects" which form "the world of M,"
Even here we do not desert the autopsychological basis; all of "M's
objects" are still objects of the one constructio~alsystem and thus go
back ultimately to the basic object of that system, i.e., to a relation which
holds between elementary experiences (my experiences!). However,
is a certain sense in which one can speak of the constructional sysof M ;by this is meant nothing but a certain branch of "the" (or
my9') constructional system that branches off at a high level. The only
Qson why we can envisage this branch as a constructional system is
that it mirrors the entire constructional system by virtue of a certain
aalogy. We call it the constructional system "of M" only because,
within"the" (or 'Lmy") constructional system, it is constructed as havjng a certain connection with M's body.

224

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

146. Intersubjective Correspondence
From the indicated way of constructing the "world of M", it follows
that, between this world and "my world", there exists a certain analogy;
more precisely, the analogy holds between the constructional system as
a whole (S) and the "constructional system of M (SM). I t must be
remembered, however, that Sx is only a partial system within S; the
world of M is constructed within my world; it is not to be considered as
formed by M, but as formed by me for M.
The analogy between S and Sx amounts to a very far-reaching, but
not to a complete, agreement. To begin with, for almost every construction in S, there is a corresponding construction in Sbl, which has an
analogous definitional form and whose symbol is marked by an index M.
Furthermore, corresponding assertions hold almost without exception
for correspondingly constructed objects. This holds especially for the
levels prior to the construction of the space-time world. Later on, however, in the construction of the physical and the heteropsychological
domain, this simple agreement, which depends upon analogous construction, no longer holds; on the other hand, a new type of agreement occurs.
In 8 129, it was described how "my body" was constructed first as a
visual thing and then as a physical thing, which may be designated by mb.
In an analogous way, we construct in SX an object mbx, namely, the
body of M. (Note the difference between the physical thing M and mb,.
The former is constructed with myself as the vantage point; the latter,
by proceeding from M's experiences.) From the analogy in constructional form it follows that mb and mbM agree in certain properties; for
example, they are both physical things. On the other hand, they disagree
in many other properties. For example, if M has another hair color than
I have, then we obtain two different statements about mb and m b ~ ,
respectively.
For the remaining physical things within S, it also does not hold that
they agree with the corresponding things in SJI (for the things which
stand in certain spatial relations to my body do not as a rule stand in
the same relations to M). But now we find an agreement of a new kind.
A one-to-one correspondence holds between the spatiotemporal world
of physics in S and that in S,, in the following way: the spatiotemporal
relations which hold for the physical world points in Sx also hold for the
corresponding world points in S. The same is true for qualitative relations (i.e., relations which hold on the basis of assignment). For reasons

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 225

to be explained later, we wish to call this correspondence intersubjective
correspondence. An object in SMwhich corresponds by virtue of analogous construction to an object 0 of S, we have called Ox. Now we assign
the symbol OM to the object of SMwhich intersubjectively corresponds
to the object 0.Two intersubjectively corresponding objects of S and
Sy represent (in realistic language) "the same" object, once as it is
recognized by me and the other time as it is (so far as I know) recognized by M.
EXAMPLE. The body of a third person N is not to be characterized
in Sy by a construction analogous to that in S. (Thus, it should by no
means be designated with N,.) But (under favorable conditions) there
is a physical thing in S, which intersubjectively corresponds to N, hence
which is to be designated by NM. NM then represents the person N as
it is cognized by M. Within the world of physics of S,, NM may have
an entirely different constructional definite description than N has in S;
but both objects exhibit identical properties in the respective worlds of
physics. In this case we also find a certain agreement relative to the
constructional form in that N in S as well as NM in SMis constructed
as "another person".

There are, in particular, two places where the constructional forms of
intersubjectively corresponding objects in S and S, deviate considerably from one another. mb (my body) and mbM (my body from M's
point of view) are indeed both physical things, but, unlike mbM (body
of M as it is seen by himself), mbMdoes not have a construction form
analogous to that of mb, for we construct mb in S as "my body", while
mbM is constructed in SM in the form, "body of another person". The
second deviation goes in the opposite direction: M (the body of M seen
by me) and W (the body of M seen by himself) are indeed both physical things, but are constructed differently. There is no object in SH which
would be constructed in analogy to M (hence, no object to be designated
as Mu). (The construction form of mbM is similar, but not precisely
analogous to that of M.) While M in S is constructed as "body of another
person", MMin Sx is constructed as "my body" (Mx = m b d .

147. Intersubjective Correspondence Holds for All Object Types
Intersubjective correspondence holds not only between physical objects,
but also between psychological ones. For the most part, heteropsychological objects correspond to other heteropsychological objects. In S, we
assign to N, namely, the body of another person, certain heteropsycho-

226

(

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

logical objects: in SMthere is an object Nu, again the body of another
person, which stands in intersubjective correspondence to N; certain
heteropsychological objects are assigned to Nu, and these objects stand
in intersubjective correspondence to the heteropsychological objects
which were assigned to N in S. The psychological objects of N in S
correspond to the psychological objects of NM in SMin their qualitative
structure (provided only that both constructions can be, and are, carried out).
In the construction of the psychological, the greatest differences in the
constructional forms for intersubjectively corresponding objects arise at
two points which are connected with the two just-mentioned ones,
namely, in the construction of the psychological objects which are
assigned to mb and to M (i.e., my psychological events, states, etc., and
the psychological events, states, etc., of M).
We said earlier that this intersubjective correspondence does not hold
for the lower constructional levels, but only for the levels beginning with
the construction of the space-time world, while for the lower levels we
could only show constructional analogy. However, after the intersubjective correspondence, which was first introduced for the world of physics,
has now been accomplished for the psychological world, it gives us a
thoroughgoing correspondence of all objects of S and S,. It must be
noted, however, that the intersubjective correspondence does not hold
on the lower levels between such objects of S as Rs, elex, qual, sense,
sight, and the analogously constructed objects RsM, elex,, etc., which
relate to M and his experiences. Rather, this correspondence holds between Rs, elex, etc., and certain objects RsM,elexM,etc.
EXAMPLE. elex are the (i.e., "my") elementary experiences; elexM
are the experiences of another person M; elexM,on the other hand, are
again my experiences, but in a way in which they are constructed in
S,
(in realistic language) as they are recognized by M. Of course,
these, as all objects, are constructed in S (i.e., "by me"), for there are
no other objects. S, is, after all, a part of the system S. In realistic language: elexMare my experiences, not as I know them, but as they are
known to the other person M on the basis of his observations and the
reports which I make. More precisely, they represent my knowledge
(gained through his reports and various inferences) of his awareness
of my experiences. Thus, elexMrepresents what, to my knowledge, M
knows about my experiences. Considerations precisely analogous to
the correspondence of elex to elexMhold also for the other objects of
the lower constructional levels.

OUTLW& OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

827

The intersubjective correspondence between S and SX cannot at once
be obtained for all objects of the two systems, but only after certain supplementations have been carried out. For example, the world of physics
of each of the two systems is always incomplete and the gaps do not
generally occur at the same places. Thus, the one system will contain
assignments to world points of physics where they are lacking in the
other system o r where the other system has different, incompatible assignments. (Contradictory assignments are relatively rare. Where they
occur, special criteria, which we shall not here discuss, must bring about
a decision which recognizes one of the two assignments as legitimate,
while deleting the other.) If we have disagreement in assignments, it will
in most cases be brought about by the fact that one system has an assignment where the other has a vacant place. In these cases, a corresponding,
supplementary assignment will be made in the second system in conformity with the rules for supplementation which have been given above
(8 135). (In realistic language): initially, the corresponding objects of
the two systems agree in their properties; where the agreement cannot
be proved, it is introduced as an hypothesis. Once this has been done in
all cases, intersubjective correspondence holds throughout the two
systems.
It has been stated that S, is contained in S as a proper part of S,
and it has also bcen said that the objects of both systems can be brought
into a one-to-one correspondence (intersubjective correspondence).
These two statements are not contradictory to one another, since
neither of the two systems can be completed. The second statement
means the following: for each object which is constructed in one of
the systems, an intersubjectively corresponding object can be constructed in the other as soon as the latter is sufficiently enlarged.

148. The Intersubjective World
We have seen above that, as a rule, intersubjectively corresponding objects of S and SMdiffer from one another in the way they are constructed,
but that they agree in properties which do not depend on the particular
form of construction; that is, that they agree in properties which could
be called material 'la properties. The properties which are thus in agreement and the statements about such properties we wish to call
intersubjectively communicable 11* (more precisely, "intersubjectively
Ua

inhaltlich

'"ubertragbar

228

1

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM 1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

communicable between S and SM7'). On the other hand, properties
which belong to an object only in S or only in SM, and the statements
about such properties, we call subjective in S or subjective in SM,respectively. It is easy to see that the intersubjectively communicable statements include, for example, statements about the similarity of two
qualities, furthermore, statements about color, size, odor, etc., of a given
physical thing, also statements about the emotions of a given person
at a given time, etc. Moreover, certain statements about constructional
form are intersubjectively communicable, for example, statements concerning whether an object is to be constructed as a class or as a relation,
and similar ones. However, most statements about the form of the construction of an object in S or in S, must be described as subjective in
S or in Sy, respectively. For example, this holds frequently for statements about the required order in the construction of certain objects,
and for requisite supplementations (according to $ 126, rules 7, 10).
object requires
It also holds if the construction of a certain physical
- arguments by analogy (according to $ 135), etc.
So far, we have considered only the intersubjective correspondence
between the systems S and SJr, i.e., a one-to-one correspondence of the
objects of my world and the objects of the world of a given other person
M. Now, everything that has been said about person M also holds for
the remaining "other persons," thus, for example, for N, P, etc. Hence,
there is a one-to-one intersubjective correspondence between the systems S and SN, also between the systems S and Sp, etc. What has been
said about the correspondence between S and S, also holds for these
correspondences. Now, if a one-to-one correspondence holds between
SMand S and also between S and SN,then there exists a one-to-one torrespondence between SX and SN, which has the same ropert ties as the
former correspondences. Thus, there exists a general one-to-one correspondence between all such systems, that is, between all the worlds of
all persons (i.e., normal persons known to me), including myself. Henceforth, we shall mean by intersubjective correspondence this general
correspondence and no longer the correspondence between two given
systems. Also, in an analogous way, we shall mean from now on by
intersubjectively communicable properties and intersubjectively cornmunicable statements such as continue to hold when their object is replaced by the intersubjectively corresponding object of any other system.
The class of all objects of the various systems which intersubjectivei~
correspond to a given object of any system, we call an intersubjective
object. Furthermore, a property of such a class, which it possesses

229

the basis of an intersubjectively communicable property of its elements,
we call an intersubjective property; and a statement about an intersubjective property of an intersubjective object, we call an intersubjective
statement.
EXAMPLES. If, e.g., the statement f ( 0 ) about object 0 of system S
is intersubjectively communicable, then this means that the corresponding statements f(OM),f(ON),etc., whose subjects OM, ON of systems
S, SN intersubjectively correspond to 0 , also hold. This situation is
most easily expressed through an appropriate statement about the class
which comprises the objects 0 , OM, ON, etc. If we designate the inter-

+

subjective correspondence by Int, then this class is to be called Int' 0,

+

+

but Int' OMor Int' ONwill do as well. By definition, the new statement,
--f

say F (Int' 0 ) , is an intersubjective statement that is derived from the
intersubjectively communicable statements f ( 0 ) , f (OM), etc. Classes of

+ 0 (Int'
+ OMand Int'
+ ON are identithe indicated kind, for example, Int'
cal with it) will now be called intersubjective objects. If we start with

+

another object, say P, then the class Int' P of objects P, PM, PN, etc., is
derived in the same way.
AS we can easily see from the example, the intersubjective objects are
the abstraction classes ($ 73) of intersubjective correspondence. The
world of these objects we call the intersubjective world. The indicated
(quasi-analytic) procedure of the construction of an intersubjective
object on the basis of the intersubjectively corresponding objects of the
individual systems, we call intersubjectivizing.
In contrast to other conceptions (for example, Christiansen wantkritikl) in our system intersubjectivizing is not based upon a fiction.
The constructional system confines itself to the reports of other persons
for the construction, i.e., to begin with, for the constructional supplementation of the physical world, but then also for the construction of
the heteropsychological. However, these constructions do not consist
in a hypothetical inference or fictitious postulation of something that
is not given, but they consist merely in the reorganization of the given
(cf. 5 140). The same holds for the construction of the intersubjective
world. Within the constructional system, no metaphysical assertions are
made concerning the objects which are thus constructed through re-

230 1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OP T H E WORLD

149. The Intersubjective World as the World of Science
The intersubjective world (in the sense of the above-given construction)
forms the actual object domain of science. But science contains not only
intersubjective statements, but also nonintersubjective statements that
correspond to intersubjective statements or can be transformed into intersubjective statements. This transformation is one of the tasks of science;
science aims to produce a supply of exclusively intersubjective statements. This aim is rarely stated explicitly, since the transformation generally takes place in an almost imperceptible way: we generally use the
same sign (word or special symbol) for different but intersubjectively
corresponding objects and, in addition, we use this same sign also for
the intersubjective object which corresponds to all of them (and which
we have constructed as their class).
This feature of science does not radically exclude from the domain of
science all statements which are not intersubjectively communicable, i.e.,
which are subjective. Such statements can be scientifically phrased
through a refonnulation which mentions the author in the statement.
It likewise holds for the objects to be constructed subsequently, especially for the cultural ones, that they have intersubjectively corresponding
objects in the systems SM,etc. Thus, even in their case, it is possible to
derive intersubjective objects. In doing this, the procedure of intersubjectivizing remains always the same; thus, it is not necessary to consider
it in any detail for the higher-level constructions which we shall indicate
in the sequel.

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 231

are perceived. We cannot here give an explicit account of these constructions. The reason for this is that the psychology (or phenomenology) of
the cognition of cultural objects has not been researched and systematically described to the same degree as the psychology of perception.
Thus, we give only a few examples and indicate briefly how they could
be generalized. These indications may suffice, since we are here mainly
concerned with the possibility of construction of cultural objects from
psychological objects and since we are less concerned with the question
precisely what forms these constructions must take.
EXAMPLE. The custom of greeting through the lifting of one's hat
would .
perhaps
- have to be constructed in the following form: "The custom of "greeting through the lifting of one's hat" is present in a society
(or in some other sociological grouping) at a certain time, if, among
the members of this society at that time, there is present a psychological.
disposition of such a kind that, in situations of such and such a sort, a
voluntary act of such and such a sort takes place."

AU primary cultural objects are to be constructed on the basis of their
manifestation in the indicated fashion. It is the task of a logic of the
cultural sciences to investigate which,objects of the various cultural areas
are to be constructed as primary cultural objects. A phenomenology of
the cultural sciences would then have to investigate, for each primary
cultural object, which psychological objects are its manifestations and
hence must serve as a basis for its construction and how this construction
is to be carried out.
151. The Higher Cultural Objects

150. The Primary Cultural Objects
Earlier, we have briefly characterized the cultural object type and have
emphasized its independence from the physical and psychological object
types (5 23). For the construction of cultural objects, the manifestation
relation (5 24) is of especial and fundamental importance. This is because the primary cultural objects, i.e., those objects whose construction
does not presuppose the construction of other cultural objects, are always
constructed on the basis of their manifestations (cf. 5 55 f.), i.e., on the
basis of those psychological events in which they are actualized or b e
come apparent. There is a certain analogy between the construction of
the cultural objects on the basis of their manifestations and the construction of the physic21 things on the basis of the experiences in which they

The remaining cultural objects are constructed on the basis of the primary
cultural objects, but psychological, and occasionally physical, objects are
also used. In this case, even more than in the case of the primary cultural
objects, construction theory has to await the investigations of the special
sciences in order to be able to give correct, concrete examples of constructions. Thus, we confine ourselves to the indication of an example
without being able to assert the correctness or appropriateness of precisely this constructional form.
EXAMPLE. The object "state" " 5 could perhaps be constructed in
the following form: a relational structure of persons is called a "state"
if it is characterized in such and such a way through its manifestations,

namely, the psychological behavior of these persons and the dispositions
"s

Staat

232

1

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM 1 233

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WOALD

toward such behavior, especially the disposition, on the part of some
persons, to act upon the volitions of others.
Sociological groups or organizations are, among others, the most
important higher cultural objects. Such a structure (for example, a tribe,
a family, a club, a state, etc.) must be constructed as a relation extension,
not as a class, since the order of the members within the sociological
group belongs to the character of the group. That it is not permissible
to construct these groups as classes foIIows from the possibility that the
members of two different groups are identical.
The other sociological groups must be constructed in a way which is
similar to that which we indicated for the state. In this and other ways,
we can then construct generally all higher cultural objects on the basis
of the primary cultural objects and occasionally also on the basis of
objects of other previously constructed types. Thus, we can construct,
either as primary or as derived objects, the cultural objects of all cultural
fields; hence, the entities, properties, relations, events, states, etc., of
technology, of economics, of law, of politics, of language, of art, of
science, of religion, etc. Finally, the division into, and the characterization
of, the individual fields can be carried out through further constructions.

REFERENCES.There seem to be hardly any attempts at a genuine
construction (i.e., a construction that goes back to the given) of cultural
objects, either in the literature of epistemology, of the philosophy of
history, of history, or of sociology. Even delineations of the last steps
of such a construction, starting from the psychological domain, are
relatively rare. It seems that the only investigations which we have to
mention are those by Driesch [Ordnungsl.] 421 ff., Section E, The
Order Forms of the Cultural; [Wirlichk.] 194: "Thus, an individual
state is the mental behavior of a number of individual persons as it is
guided by the contents of certain books."

1hrough the indicated way of constructing the cultural on the basis of
the psychological, as it is also found in our example of the state, the
impression could arise that the cultural objects are here unduly "psychologized". In order to overcome this objection, let us again emphasize
that the construction of one object on the basis of certain other objects
does not amount to saying that the object is similar to those other
objects; on the contrary, if the construction leads to the formation of new
logical levels (as it does in the case of the cultural objects, and especially
the higher levels of cultural objects, where it is very marked), the thusconstructed objects have a different mode of being, or, more precisely,

they belong to a different object sphere ($0 29, 41 f.). Thus, there is no
psychologism in our way of constructing the cultural objects (cf. also

6 56).
On the other hand, let it be emphasized again that the assertion that
cultural objects belong to a new object sphere is not to be understood in
any metaphysical sense. It follows from the given definition of the concept
of an object sphere that we have here nothing but a formal-logical
delineation of objects against one another. According to the conceptions
of construction theory, no relation between two object types other than
the formal-logical relation which depends upon the constructional forms
of the types can become the subject of a scientific statement.

152. The Domain of Values
So far, we have given or indicated the construction of the most importmt
object types familiar in daily life and in science, to wit: the physical, the
psychological, and the cultural. In conclusion, let us briefly indicate now
the construction of the values, at least in their general methodological
form. Here, even less than with other object types, can we expect h a l
formulations, since the domain of values, as far as the character of its
objects and their recognition is concerned, is to an especially high degree
problematic and subject to controversy.
The construction of values does not continue from the already discussed levels of the cultural or the heteropsychological, but connects with
an earlier stage of the constructional system. We have to distinguish
several types of values, for example, the ethical, the aesthetic, the religious, the biological (in the widest sense, including technological and
economic values, values of individual and social hygiene), and others.
The construction of values from certain experiences, namely, value
experiences, is in many ways analogous to the construction of physical
things from "perceptual experiences" (more precisely, from sense qualities). Let it suffice here to indicate some examples of such experiences.
For the construction of ethical values, for example, we must consider
(among others) experiences of conscience, experiences of duty or of
responsibility, etc. For aesthetic values, we take into account experiences
Of (aesthetic) pleasure or other attitudes in the appreciation of art,
experiences of artistic creation, etc. The particular nature of the value
experiences of the different value types is investigated by the phenomenology of values; we cannot here concern ourselves with the details of
this issue. Once the phenomenological analysis is carried out, we can give

234

1

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM
THE LOGICAL

STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

a constructional expression for the characteristic properties of the various
value experiences with the aid of the autopsychological qualities and
their components, which have been constructed earlier, especially the
emotions and volitions ( $ 131 f.) . On the basis of those constructions,
we can then form the construction of the various value types. This should
not be considered a psychologizing of values, just as the construction of
physical objects from sense qualities does not amount to a psychologizing
of the physical. In realistic language, values themselves are not experiential or psychological, but exist independently of being experienced.
They are merely recognized in the experiences (more precisely, in the
value sensations 116 whose intentional objects they are). In like fashion,
a physical thing is not psychological, but exists independently of perception and is merely recognized through a perception whose intentional
object it is. On the other hand, construction theory does not spcalc this
kind of realistic language, but is neutral toward the metaphysical component of realistic statements. However, construction theory provides a
translation into constructional language of the indicated statement about
the relation between values and value sensations. This translation is
analogous to the translation of the statement concerning the relation between physical things and perceptions; that is to say, it emphasizes a
purely logical relation, namely, that one object is determined through
the nature of another.
This concludes the outline of the constructional system.

153. The Problem of Eliminating the Basic Relations
( $ $ 153-155 may be omitted.)
Every constructional system rests upon basic relations which are introduced as undefined basic concepts. Thus, all constructed objects are
complexes (p 36) of the basic relations. All statements which occur in
the constructional system are statements about nothing but the basic
relations. Formally, they initially contain indeed also other objects;
however, through substitution of the constructional definitions of these
objects, it is possible to transform them step by Step in such a way that
their external sentence form, too, finally contains only the symbols of the
basic relations (and logical symbols). For the present constructiona1
system, in whose outline only one basic relation (Rs) is used, this has
been discussed in $ 119 in the example of theorem Th.6 concerning the
three-dimensionality of the color solid.
Wertgefiihl

1

235

However, this characteristic of the statements of a constructional
system is not in harmony with the earlier thesis that statements of science
are purely structural statements or that, in principle, it is possible to
transform them into such statements, and that in the progress of science
they should be so transformed (5 15 f.). A purely structural statement
must contain only logical symbols; in it must occur no undefined basic
concepts from any empirical domain. Thus, after the constructional
system has carried the formalization of scientific statements to the point
where they are merely statements about a few (perhaps only one) basic
relations, the problem arises whether it is possible to complete this
formalization by eliminating from the statements of science these basic
relations as the last, nonlogical objects.
That this elimination is possible becomes obvious through the following consideration. Given a constructional system which proceeds from
certain basic relations, there is a possibility that this system can also be
formulated with a different set of basic relations. But then the construction of each object would have to be formulated in a different way.
Assume that we were to try to transform the previous constructional
definitions by simply substituting the new basic relations for the old
ones; it would then indeed be possible for the lower levels that the thustransformed definitions are not meaningless or empty. But for a reasonably high level, the probability of such an accident is extremely small. It
is still less likely that the empirical statements of the constructional
system about constructed objects would accidentally continue to hold
even after the transformation. From this it follows that the original basic
relations can be characterized by saying that the objects which are construtted from them in a certain way show a certain empirical behavior;
definite descriptions of the basic relations could be formulated with referewe to the behavior of objects on a sufficiently high level. Thus it follows
fhat it is possible to define, through purely logical concepts, the basic
relations which were originally introduced as undehed basic concepts.

154. "Founded" Relation Extensions
tank of eliminating the basic relations as the only nonlogical objects
of the constructional system contains one more difficulty to which we
have to pay some further attention. We had assumed that, after a re~ I ~ r n e of
n tone set of basic relations by another, the constructional
of the system would not remain applicable, and the empirical
'fatemem would cease to hold. However, our assumption is justified

238

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

only if the new relation extensions are not arbitrary, unconnected pair
lists, but if we require of them that they correspond to some experienceable, "natural" relations (to give a preliminary, vague expression).
If no such requirement is made, then there are certainly other relation extensions for which all constructional formulas can be produced.
However, in such a case, the construction leads to other entities than
with the original relation extensions, but, for these other entities, the
same empirical statements still hold as for the original ones (that is to
say, the symbols for these statements are still the same, but they now
mean something different). All we have to do is to carry out a one-to-one
transformation of the set of basic elements into itself and determine as
the new basic relations those relation extensions whose inventory is the
transformed inventory of the original basic relations. In this case, the
new relation extensions have the same structure as the original ones
(they are "isomorphic", cf. 5 11). From this it follows that, to each
originally constructed object, there corresponds precisely one new one
with the same formal properties. Thus all statements of the construc.:anal system continue to hold, since they concern only formal properties.
However, we can then not find any sense 117 for the new basic relations;
they are lists of pairs of basic elements without any (ex~elienceable)
connection. It is even more difficult to find for the constructed objects
any entities which are not in some way disjointed.
In contrast to relations of this sort, we wish to call relation extensions
which correspond to experienceable, "natural" relations founded relation
extensions. Thus, the various member pairs of founded relation extensions
have something in common that can be experienced.
We have seen ( $ 153) that the basic relations can be eliminated only
by characterizing them through the behavior of sufficiently high-level
objects which are constructed from them. If this characterization is to
become a definite description, it must be limited to founded relation
extensions. This establishes the importance of the concept of founded
relation extensions for the constructional system, for, if we take into
account all relation extensions (in the formal-logical sense of arbitrary,
ordered couples), then the basic relations are not the only ones which
satisfy the definite descriptions, but they are the only ones among the
founded relation extensions. We shall use the example of our consmctional system to carry out such a definite description ( 3 155).
The given explanation of the concept of foundedness is not meant as
a definition; it is merely to make comprehensible what is meant. The
117 Beziehungssinn

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 237

concept of foundedness is undefinable. It cannot be derived from constructed concepts, since it is the most fundamental concept of the
constructional system. It also can not be derived from the (customary)
basic concepts of formal logic. On the other hand, it does not belong to
any definite extralogical object domain, as all other nonlogical objects do.
Our considerations concerning the characterization of the basic relations
of a constructional system as founded relation extensions of a certain
kind hold for every constructional system of any domain whatever. It is
perhaps permissible, because of this generality, to envisage the concept
of foundedness as a concept of logic and to introduce it, since it is
undefinable, as a basic concept o f logic. That this concept is concerned
with the application to object domains is not a valid objection to introducing it as a basic concept of logic. The same is true for another basic
concept of logic, namely, generality: "(x) fx" means that the propositional function of fx has the value true for every argument of an object
domain in which it is meaningful. Logic is not really a domain at all, but
contains those statements which (as tautologies) hold for the objects of
any domain whatever. From this it follows that it must concern itself
precisely with those concepts which are applicable to any domain whatever. And foundedness, after all, belongs to these concepts. In view of
these reasons, let us introduce the class of founded relation extensions
as a basic concept of logic (logistic symbol: found) without therefore
considering the problem as already solved.

155. Elimination o f the Basic Relation Rs
Let US use our constructional system as an example in order to show how
the elimination of the basic relations and thus the final formalization of
the constructional system can be camed out, if we make the justmentioned assumption that found can be taken as a basic concept of logic.
The undefined basic relation Rs, we define in the following way: Rs is the
Only founded relation extension from which we can construct in a given
way a certain sufficiently high-level object, still to be chosen, which
Shows certain empirical characteristics.
We have to choose a sufEciently high-level empirical theorem about
Let us abbreviate this theorem as Th(Rs). We envisage this theorem
as generated from the propositional function Th(R) through introduction
the argument Rs. "Rs" is now definitely described as that particular
founded relation which satisfies Th(R). Thus, we define:
Rs = d I ~ ' { f ~ u n n
d

R (L ( R ) ) }

138 1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

In order to show that this can be practically carried out, we choose
as our empirical statement theorem Th. 6 concerning the threedimensionality of the color solid ( $ 118). We have shown earlier how
this theorem can be expressed as a statement exclusively about Rs
( $ 119 [ 5 ] ) . Considering the complicated nature of the statement about
Rs, it is perhaps permissible to assume that it is of sufficiently high level.
This statement is the value for Rs of a certain propositional function
'I'h(R), which has the following form (abbreviated) :
(jQ, V ) . 3 Dnhomv~c(z I Q / r) ; 1 Abstr ' { a b ( ( g ~ ,A, ,A) . . . .
. . . (38) . 8 c S i m i l 1 ( R U R u R . ) . a C 8 . ~ - r S ) . a T p c R u R
U Ro)
We now define the basic relation Rs as the only founded relation which
satisfies this propositional function (abbreviated) :
Rs=,,il{found n R ( ( j Q , " ) . 3 Dnhornvic . . .

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1

230

A further purpose of the outline was to show that a constructional
system of all scientific objects is, in principle, possible, no matter how the
details of such a system would have to be formulated. We do not only
wish to assert here that it is possible in general to erect some constructional system or another; rather, we wish to defend the thesis that it is
possible (though perhaps not necessary in all points) to give the following properties to the constructional system, which are also found in the
system which we have tentatively outlined:

A. Formal Theses
1. The basic elements are all of the same type.
2. The basic order is established through relation extensions
( ยง 75).
3. The basic relations are all of the same level.
4. A
ll basic relations are first-level relation extensions (i.e.,
. . . ( ~ ~ ) . S ~ S ~ ~ ~ ~ ' ( R U R U R . ) . ~ C ~ . X W ~ ~ ) . ~ ~ ~ C R U R relation extensions of basic elemcnts).
u W))
5. A small number of basic relations suffices.
This expression which defines Rs no loqger contains anythirig but
6. ( A conjecture) : One basic relation suffices ( 8 82).
logical symbols and variables. Since a11 objects and statements of the
B. Material Theses
constructional system can be expressed through Rs, it is now possible to
7. The basic elements are experiences as unanalyzable units
express all objects and statements o f the constructioital system in a purely
( $ 67 f.).
logical way. Thus our aim of the complete formalization of the construe8. "My" elementary experiences are the basic elements ("autotional system is achieved. We have shown that (and, through the sugpsychological basis" [$ 641).
gestions in the outline of the constructional system, also how) all objects
9. (A conjecture): Rs (recollection of similarity) can be taken
of science can be envisaged as structural objects, and all statements of
as the only basic relation ( $ 78).
science can be envisaged as structural statements and can be transformed
10. The following objects occur in the indicated sequence: quality
into structure sentences. We had to presuppose, however, that found is a
classes, sense classes, the visual sense, visual field places,
logical concept; here lies an unresolved problem.
colors (possibly before the visual field places), space and
time order, the visual things, my body, the other autopsychological
objects (possibly before the spatial order), physical
156. Theses about the Constructional System
objects, other persons, heteropsychological objects, cultural
objects, objects of all kinds as intersubjective objects
In concluding the presentation of the constructional system, let us
( $ 5 112-151).
again emphasize what is important in this system outline and what is not.
11.
The
construction of the world of physics consists in an assignThe primary purpose in the formation of a constructional system was to
ment
of numbers ("state magnitudes") to the elements
illustrate, by way of an example, the actual content of construction
(world
points) of a four-dimensional number array (spaeetheory, namely, to formulate the problems of forming such a system. In
time
system)
;the assignment is based upon the distribution of
order to fulfill this purpose, the outline had to be given with a certain
the
quality
classes
( $ 5 125-136).
amount of detail in spite of the shortcomings in its content. These short12.
The
construction
of
heteropsychological objects rests upon the
comings were not so much due to difficulties which arise from some of the
expression
relation
(including
the reporting relation) o r upon
unsolved logical problems; rather, they arose from difficulties and as yet
the
psychophysical
relation
(
$
3 140, 57 f.).
unresolved problems in the individual empirical sciences.

U O

I THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

13. The construction of cultural objects rests upon the manifestation relation ( $ $ 55 f., 150).
Thesis 6, that only one basic relation is required, and, to a greater
extent thesis 9, concerning the special nature of this basic relation, are
expressly indicated as conjectures. We are considerably more certain that
thesis 5 concerning the small number of basic relations is correct. bJ
previous attempts at tables of categories o r basic postulates,lls from
Aristotle to Driesch, appear to us, all of them, to be too rich (cf. $ 83).
T h e reason for this lies in the fact that the methodological tools which
were used are unsatisfactory. Only the application of the logicoconstructive method shows how in many cases which were considered
irreducible a reduction and thus a construction is possible.

Summary
IV. OUTLINEOF

A

CONSTRUCTIONAL
SYSTEM(106-156)

A. The Lower Levels: Autopsychological Objects (106-122)
The only purpose of this outline is to provide an example for the clarification
of construction theory. The lower levels are to be given in somewhat greater
detail, on the basis of the preceding formal and material investigations. In
addition to the constructional definitions, we give some theorems as examples; these are either analytic, that is, deducible from the definitions, or empirical. Like all other scientific propositions, these theorems can be translated
into propositions about the basic relation alone: an analytic theorem will
then result in a tautology, an empirical theorem in a proposition about an
empirical, formal property of the basic relation (106).
To begin with, the logical and mathematical concepts (the latter actually
form a part of the former) must be defined. They presuppose only the fundamental logical concepts, not the basic relation; they are not concepts in the
sense of empirical concepts (107). On the basis of the basic relation (recollection of similarity, 108), the constructions of the following concepts are
given (the constructions correspond to the derivations in $5 67-94 and are
given in the previously indicated languages, $195-1 02) : the elementary
experiences (109), part similarity ( 1 l o ) , similarity circles (1 11), quality
classes (1 12), part identity ( 113). similarity between qualities (1 14), Sense
classes, visual sense (1 IS), the sensations, analysis of experiences into their
individual and general constituents (1 16), visual field places and their order
in the visual field ( 117), the colors and their order in the color solid ( 118) P
the preliminary time order (120).
The thesis that every scientific concept is either a class or a relation exten-

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 241

sion which can be expressed through the basic relation alone is clarified by
taking the concept of the sense modalities as an example. The thesis that
every scientific proposition can be transformed into a proposition about the
basic relation alone is exemplified through the empirical proposition about
the threedimensionality of the color solid ( 119).
By the derivation relation of an object we understand a certain expression
which indicates how the object is derived from the basic relation; it designates
a purely logical concept. If we replace each construction by the corresponding
derivation relation, we formulate the constructional system in the form of a
purely logical system; by substituting the basic relation, this system is then
transformed into the proper constructional system of all empirical concepts
(121).
B. The Intermediate Levels: Physical Objects (123-138)
There are several ways of constructing three-dimensional space (to begin
with visual things) from the two-dimensional order of the visual field (124).
We choose that form which utilizes only the temporal sequence of the visual
lields which occur in the experiences (we do not use kinesthetic sensations);
the fourdimensional "visual world" results through the assignment of colors
to the "world points" (125-127). Certain parts of this visual world are the
"visual things" (128). One of these is especially important: my body; it has
certain unique properties which allow a definite description of it (129). With
its aid, definite descriptions of the other senses can be given (we include here
the emotions 1130, 1311). The experiences have now been analyzed into
their qualitative constituents; the latter have been divided into sense modalities and components. With the aid of these entities, all conscious processes
can be constructed. These are supplemented by the so-called unconscious
processes in order to provide more thoroughgoing regularities. Conscious
and unconscious processes together form the total domain of the autopsychological. The self is the class of autopsychological states (132).
From the visual world results the perceptual world of "perceptual things"
through the assignment of the qualities of the remaining senses (133, 134).
This assignment is supplemented by certain rules of analogy (which correspond to the categories of causality and substance [135]). The perceptual
World stands in contrast to the world of physics, where we assign to the world
Points not qualities but numbers, namely, the values of physical state magnitudes. In the world of physics, strict laws hold which can be mathematically
formulated, and it can be intersubjectivized in an unequivocal fashion; this
constitutes an advantage over the perceptual world (136). It is possible, in
the world of physics, to give definite descriptions of all physically differentiable processes and things, hence, for example, organisms, and among them
especially other persons, and all other biological concepts (137). The expression relation and the psychophysical relation can be constructed with the aid
of the processes of "my body" (138).

242

1 THE WGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

C . The Upper Levels: Heteropsychological and Cultural Objects
( I 39-1 56)
The construction of the heteropsychological consists in the assignment of
psychological events to the body of another person with the aid of the expression relation. Hence, from the viewpoint of construction theory, the heteropsychological consists in a reorganization of the autopsychological. If the
psychophysical relation were better known, then we could use it instead of
the expression relation for a more precise and complete construction of the
heteropsychological. The heteropsychological, just as the autopsychological,
is supplemented through the addition of the unconscious ( 140). For the construction of the heteropsychological, we must use-aside from the expression
relation in the narrower sense-also "sign production", namely, the linguistic
expressions of other persons. The relation of sign production is constructed in
analogy to the learning of a foreign language without interpreter, initially
for words (141), then for sentences: "reporting relation" (142). In the
actual learning of a language, understanding is, for the most part, intuitive;
in the construction, this intuition is rationally reconstructed (143). The reports of other persons are now used for further constructions: all object
types are enriched, but nothing that is new in principle can be brought into
the system. Utilizing the reports of others does not mean that the autopsychological basis has been abandoned; after all, the reports have been constructed on that basis (144).
From the constructed experiences of another person M we can construct
the "world of M in analogy to the construction of "my world" from "my
experiences". We now find two relations between the objects of M and the
objects of my world: 1, the relation of analogous construction, which must
be taken into account especially on the lower levels (145) and 2. the intersubjective correspondence between empirically identical objects (e.g., between
my Berlin and that of M [146]). This correspondence can now be used for the
supplementation of each of the two systems (147). A class of intersubjectively
corresponding objects, one of which is in my system and the remaining in the
systems of the other persons is called an "intersubjective object" (e.g., the
class of the objects "Berlin" in the various systems) ; they form the intersubjective world (148). It is the proper object domain of the sciences (149).
The primary cultural objects (i.e., those which do not presuppose any
other cultural objects for their construction) are constructed on the basis of
their manifestations, i.e., on the basis of psychological objects (150). With
their aid we can then construct the other cultural objects, where the sociological objects must be constructed predominantly as relations. The construction of the cultural from the psychological does not amount to "psychologizing", for the cultural objects form new object spheres (15 1).
With the domains of the autopsychological, the physical, the heteropsycho-

OUTLINE OF A CONSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEM

1 243

logical, and the cultural, the most important object types have been constructed. Values are mentioned as an example of a further object type. They
are to be constructed on the basis of "value experiences" in analogy to the
construction of the physical on the basis of sense qualities (152).
In principle, all statements of science are translatable into statements about
the basic relation; can it, too, be eliminated so that all statements are pure
structure statements (153)? It turns out that this is possible, but only if the
concept of a founded relation extension is added to the fundamental concepts
of logic. Founded relation-extensions are those which correspond to natural,
experienceable relations. It remains problematic whether this addition is permissible (154). The elimination is clarified by means of an example (155).
The purpose of the indicated outline of a constructional system is merely
to illustrate the theory. On the other hand, what is asserted as valid is stated
in a few theses. The formal theses say the following: all basic elements are
of the same level. The basic relations are on the first level; there is only a
small number of them, perhaps only one. The nraterial theses state: the basic
elements are "my experiences" as unanalyzable units; it is possible that recollection of similarity suffices as basic relation; the following can be constructed
in sequence: qualities, senses, visual sense, visual field, colors, space and time
order, visual things, my body, the other autopsychological objects, the physical objects, among them other persons, heteropsychological and cultural
objects, objects of all kinds as intersubjective objects. The construction of
the world of physics is an array of numbers on the basis of the distribution
of qualities; the construction of the heteropsychological is based on the expression and reporting relations or on the psychophysical relation; the construction of the cultural is based upon the manifestation relation (156).

246

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

157. T h e Constructional System as the Basis o f Philosophical
Investigations
After having given, in the previous section, an outline of the constructional system, we now want to show, by way of example, the value of
such a system for the clarification of philosophical problems. The virtue
of the constmctional system in this connection does not lie in the presentation of materially new insights, which could then be used for the
solution of those problems. What it achieves is actually only a uniform
ordering of concepts which allows a clearer formulation of the q~~estion
for each problem and thus brings us closer to a solution.
Since the given constructional system is only a preliminary outline, we
do not wish to base the following considerations upon details of this
system, but only upon its character as a whole. Hence, we presuppose
the possibility of a unified system of concepts and the possibility of
constructing this system from experiential relations as basic concepts in
the following sequence: the autopsychological, the physical, the heteropsychological, the cultural. Thus we presuppose roughly what has been
stated in the theses of ยง 156. The problems which we shall discuss are
meant only as examples. In this book, the emphasis is put on construction
theory itself, not upon its application; thus, we cannot give a detailed
discussion of the individual problems. We must leave this for a separate
discussion. It is still less feasible to give an exhaustive survey of all those
problems which can be treated in connection with construction theory.
We can here only suggest in what way construction theory sheds light
upon various problem situations and what course a subsequent, detailed
treatment would have to take.
To begin with, we shall briefly discuss some problems of essence,llg
among them the problems of identity, the self, dualism of the physical
and the psychological, and causality ( ยง ยง 158-1 65). Furthermore, we
shall consider the psychophysical problem ($5 166-169) and the problem of reality ( 9 3 170-178) ; in both cases, we shall clearly distinguish
the constructional aspect of the problem from its metaphysical aspect.
Finally, we shall discuss the question of the limitation of (rational)
knowledge and shall clarify the distinction between science and metaphysics ( $ 8 179-183).
"s

Wesensprobleme

SOME PROBLEMS OF ESSENCE

158. bout the Diflerence between Individual and Gmeral
Concepts are usually divided into individual concepts and general concepts; the concept Napoleon is an individual concept; the concept
mammal, a general concept. From the standpoint of eonstmction theory,
this division is not justified, or, rather, it is ambiguous, since every concept, depending upon one's point of view, can be considered either an
individual concept or a general concept. We have stated this earlier
($ 5) and have derived from it the justification for speaking of the object
which corresponds to a given concept. NOWthat we know the construetional forms, in particular the ascension forms (111, A, especially ยง 4019
we realize that, just as the general concepts, (almost) all of the so-ca11ed
individual concepts are classes or relalion extensions.
EXAMPLE. Let us use for clarification the following descending
sequence of objects (or concepts). The dog (species) is a class to which
my dog L U C ~ Sbelongs. ~ u c h sis a class whose elements are the "states"
of Luchs. An individual state of Luchs (as a perceptual thing) is a
whose elements are points of the perceptual world. One such point is a
many-place relation extension whose terms are four numerical terms

248

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

(namely, the space-time coordinates) and one or more sense qualities;
a sense quality is a class "of my experiences". The latter are here en-

visaged as basic elements.
In the ordinary view, some of the concepts in this example would have
to be called individual and others general. But each of them (except for
the last one) is constructed as a class or relation extension, and each of
them is an element of the preceding class or a term of the preceding
relation extension; thus, each of them is a generality lZ0 of other objects.
What is the reason that, in the ordinary view, e.g., the species dog and
the sense quality brown are considered something general while the dog
Luchs, and a given world point, and a given experience are considered
something individual, and that frequently only the latter are called
"objects", while the former are called "mere concepts"?
The investigation of this and similar examples shows, to begin with,
that the so-called individual objects have in common that they are
temporally determined, either as belonging to a given time point or a
connected time stretch. Furthermore, there is always a definite space
point or a connected spatial area to which they belong, if they can be
spatially determined at all. On the other hand, the sense quality brown,
for example, has many unconnected space-time areas assigned to it
(namely, the areas of those space-time points in which this brown is
experienced, i.e., to which it is assigned during the construction of the
perceptual world).
However, there are orders (though not spatio-temporal orders) in
which either points or connected areas are associated with so-called
general concepts. For example, to brown-if it is a precisely determined
hue, etc.-there belongs a point of the color solid or, if we are concerned
with brown in general, a connected part of the color solid. Similarly, the
species dog is, as it were, assigned a point of the zoological solid (the
system of animal species) and to the class of mammals there belongs a
connected part of this solid.
Thus, the difference between individual and general objects (or concepts) rests upon the distinction between spatio-temporal and other
orders. Usually, only objects which are individualized with respect to the
first order are considered individuals. The problem of why this is so is
thus reduced to the problem of finding out what distinguishes the orders
of space and time from the others. We shall see later that these two
orders are also fundamental for the characterization of real-typical 12'
lZ0

121

ein Allgemeines
~irklichkeitsarti~

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1

249

objects (3 172 ff.). The distinction which we wish to discover goes back
to a difference between two types of relation extensions which have
quality classes as terms. We shall concern ourselves only with the visual
sense, since it has more bearing on this issue than any of the others. We
are then concerned with the difference between place identity and
color identity of two quality classes of the visual sense. Upon the first
of these relation extensions rests the construction of the spatial order;
upon the second rests the qualitative order of the colors, the "color
solid". We have seen earlier ( 3 91) that there is a formal difference
between the two relation extensions which stems from the fact that
different place-identical quality classes can never belong to the same
elementary experience, but that different color-identical ones can. This
difference was required at that juncture to differentiate the two relation
extensions and thus the two orders (visual field and color solid) and to
construct each of them separately ( 3 3 88 ff., 117 f.). We also realized,
at that time, that this difference does not only have formal-logical import;
since the spatial order is derived precisely from place identity, spatial
order could not fulfill its peculiar role in the synthesis of cognition 122 if
it were not for this formal-logical property of place ide~ilty.This role of
spatial order is to serve as the principle of individuation and also
(according to the subsequent discussion, 3 172 ff.) as principium
realisationis, namely, as the principle which allows us to posit something
initially as real-typical, and eventually as real. We must add that similar
considerations hold for temporal order, which is connected with spatial
order in the construction of the physical world. The reason why temporal
order can also play both of these roles, namely, that of a principle of
individuation as well as that of a principle of concretion, is that temporal
order also leads to a separation of the characteristics (particularly of the
quality classes) of elementary experiences, since characteristics of nonidentical experiences are held to be temporally different, and vice versa.
In fact, temporal order can play these roles logically prior to spatial
order.
The view of construction theory concerning the difference between
individual and general objects can now be formulated as follows: There
are two types of order-initially only for quality classes, but derivatively
also for any objects whatever-which are differentiated by the fact that
the relation extensions upon which they are based have a certain formallogical distinction, which has to do with whether two quality classes can
belong to the same elementary experience. The first k i d comprises the
Erkenntnissynthese

250

1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E W O R L D

orders which we called temporal and spatial; the second kind, all others.
The formal-logical properties of the relation extensions which generate
the first type of order make it possible to use these orders as principles
of individuation and thus also as principles of concretion
(which
presupposes individuation). Thus, there results an ascertainable, formal
distinction between such objects which are assigned (cither themselves
or through the mediation of their elements) to points or a connected area
of orders of the first kind and objects which do not have this property.
The former, we call "objccts of the first type"; and the latter, "objects of
the second type". It turns out that, for an object of the second type, there
is always an order of the second type (i.e., such an order can be constructed) such that the object corresponds to a point or a connected
partial area of this order. Thus objects of the first and of the second
types behave analogously relative to their respective orders. It is of
course permissible to use the customary designations "individual" and
"general" for the objects of the first and second types. However, these
expressions should not be thought to refer to any but the indicated
differentiating properties; it must be especially noted that the so-called
individual objects are in no sense logically simpler or more uniform than
the general objects.

159. On Identity
The problem of identity is connected with the just-discussed problem of
the distinction between individual and general objects. For its clarification, it presupposes a solution of that problem, namely, a recognition of
the logical import of that distinction.
The problem of identity arises only because it is not the case that each
object has only one name (in the widest sense). Thus, basically, the
problem is to determine when two or more different expressions designate
the same object. That there are several different expressions for the same
object is not just an empirical shortcoming of the system of expressions.
Rather, a nlultiplicity of names is logically brought about by the fact
that, for each object, we may have not only a proper name (more than
one proper name is superfluous), but that we also have definite descriptions; in fact, always severaI of them (perhaps even arbitrarily many).
We have explained earlier ( 9 13) that a definite description consists
in the following: an object is described through an indication of
overlapping classes to which it belongs, or through relations to other
1
2
'

Wirkhchkeitssetmng

CLARIFlCATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHlCAL PROBLEMS

I

251

objects, or through a purely structural description of its place in a relational structure. This description is carried to the point where it holds
only for this object alone and for no other object. We have seen the
fundamental importance of definite descriptions, especially for construction theory, since the constructional system consists of nothing but such
descriptions in the form of constructional definitions. Moreover, definite
descriptions play an important role in all other questions of epistemic and
especially of scientific identification. The following are all definite descriptions which may occur in questions: "the father of Mr. A", "the
birth day of Mr. A", "the species of this beetle", "the specific resistance
of copper", etc. As an answer, we require other definite descriptions of
the same objects, namely, names of persons, dates, numbers, etc. The
questions have a point only because there are different descriptions of the
same object, namely, the description in a question ("the birth date of
Mr. A") and the description of the answer ("March 22, 1832"). EXpressions designating the same object, we call synonymous. In this
connection, we must pay attention to the distinction between nominatum
and sense of an objcct sign; it corresponds to the distinction between
logical and epistemic value of statements ( ยง 50). The expressions, "the
birth date of Mr. A and "March 22, 1832", have the same nominatum,
for it is the same day which is designated by both of them. On the other
hand, they have obviously different senses. This is shown by the fact
that it is not trivial to claim that they are identical.
Substitutability is the criterion for an identical nominatum: two designations are said to be synonymous if each propositional function which
is turned into a true sentence through the substitution of one of the
designations does the same upon the substitution of the other. This is the
definition of logical identity.
EXAMPLE. The sentences, "Goethe died on March 22, 1832" and
"Goethe died on the birthday of Mr. A" are both true. The same holds
for all other sentences about this date. That one of these two sentences
is important while the other one is not, is of no consequence in this
context. All that matters for a criterion that two designations have the
same nominatum, i.e., a criterion for "identity", is the truth value of the
sentences involved.
Identity, in common usage and also in the usage of science, is not
always taken in the strictest sense. Language often treats objects which
are not identical in the strict, logical sense as identical; whether objects
are envisaged as identical is frequently shown through the use of the

252

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

words "the same" or simply "this". Frequently, identity does not hold
for the object which is ostensibly meant, but for its kind; in these cases,
the object functions as a representative of its kind.
EXAMPLES. The question, "Do you already have this book? this
butterfly?'does not mean the indicated object itself, but the kind, as
whose representative the object is taken. This improper identification
can have various different aspects, as can be seen from the following
four sentences: "The public transport system in A has the same trains
as that in B." "Today, I came home on the same train as yesterday,
namely, on the 6 :12." "This is the same train that used to run on Route
10." "I was sitting in the train which you saw go by."

The indicated examples show that in some cases it is clear to what
the identity is supposed to relate, i.e., as representatives of what kind the
object is meant. For example, in the case of an animal or a plant, we
mean, as a rule, the species. In different cases, depending on the context,
an object is held to be the representative of entirely different classes. In
these cases, the identity, which is ostensibly related to the object itself,
holds only for one of these classes. This is the case in our example of the
four sentences about the train. In order to be able, in these cases, to
characterize the diiference in the aspects of identification, we can use two
different modes of approach or modes of expression. According to the
first approach, we are, in these cases (for example, in the case of the four
sentences), not concerned with identity, but with various other relations,
which, however, are envisaged as identity (either linguistically or conceptually). According to the second approach, we are not here concerned
with similarity (in this or that respect), but with identity in the strict
sense, however, not with identity between the individual objects which
occur here, but between objects on a higher level (classes or relation
extensions), of which the objects are representatives.
EXAMPLE. Let us apply the first mode of approach to the above
example of the four sentences about the train. In this case, we say that
the identity, which is expressed in the form of words, does not, strictly
speaking, obtain between the objects, but that various other relations
hold between them, namely, (a) similarity in construction and looks,
(b) the identical time of day or the identical place in the time schedule,
(c) "genidentity" (cf. 5 1281, i.e., association of various "thing-states" lZ4
with one object, (d) the intersubjective correspondence between thingstates (cf. ยง 146). On the other hand, under the second mode of approach, we take the trains to be representatives of objects of a

CLARIFICATIONOF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 253

higher level; these higher-level objects, for which identity holds in
the strict sense, are, in our four cases, (a) the manufacturing pattern,
as a class of trains; (b) the arrangement to have a daily train at
6:12 P.M., as a class of train runs; (c) the physical thing "train" as
the class of its states; (d) the intersubjective object "train" as the class
of those objects which are in intersubjective correspondence (D 148),
that is to say, an individual train in the intersubjective sense. It can be
seen that identity in the strict sense does not hold between the objects
themselves, but only between the higher-level objects which they represent. This is quite obvious in the first three cases, namely, (a) manufacturing pattern, (b) the arrangement of which I make use on both
days, and (c) the physical thing at different times. It is somewhat more
difficultto recognize this in case (d), where identity holds only for the
intersubjective object, which is constructed as a class, but not for the
individual objects which are intersubjectively correlated to one another.
I can here only refer back to the earlier presentation of intersubjectivization (5 5 146-149).
The above considerations show that, with every identity statement, we
must pay careful attention to whether or not identity is meant in the strict
sense. One may say that, in most cases of linguistic identity (that is to
say, when words like "the same" or "this" are used or even if the same
word is used several times), we are concerned with improper identity. In
such cases (according to the second approach), the objects are taken as
representatives of strictly identical objects of a higher level; (in the first
approach): instead of with identity, we are here concerned with other
equivalence relations (Q 11). Relations of this kind are especially likeness
of any kind, meaning the agreement in any property whatever, genidentity ( $ 128), and intersubjective correspondence (Q 146 f.). The
last two are frequently confused with (proper) identity; this is perhaps
due to the fact that, so far, they have not received any name. In all cases
where such relations hold, the higher-level object for which the identity
holds is constructed from the nonidentical objects with the aid of the
relation in question; it is only this construction which gives us the right
to speak of identity in these cases.

REFERENCES. There are some essentially correct remarks about
genidentity in the literature, in which this relation is falsely described
as "identity"; these remarks receive their just recognition only after the
two relations are clearly distinguished. Thus, for example, Cornelius'
claim (opposed by Gomperz [Weltansch.] 163) that "identity" (where
genidentity is meant) must be constructed from certain agreements
between experiences is justified. Furthermore, Volkelt's critical remark
against Avenarius [Gewissheit] 130, that "identity" (where, again, gen-

254

1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T I f E WORLD

identity is meant) 1s not originally given and thus must not be considered "pure experience", is correct.
It is remarkable that occasionally the temporal sequence of concept
formation is such that, first, a relation of the just-described sort is
linguistically takcn as identity, and that the higher-level object which
justifies this usage is constructed only afterward. In fact, the higher-level
object is constructed, as it were, precisely through this improper use of
language. In this context, we must also mention the method of constructing an object on the basis of other objects by indicating under what
conditions two of the latter objecis are to be considered identical.
EXAMPLES. The construction of perceptual things which rests upon
genidentity can, for example, take the following form: "A perceived
thing a and a perceived thing b are the same thing if a and b fulfill such
and such conditions (namely, the ge~dentitycriteria) ." Likewise, animal
species (and, in an analogous way, plant species) are constructed in
zoology by speaking of "the same" animal, if such and such criteria
are fulfilled. The above-mentioned four cases, where we spoke of "the
same" train, can also be used as examples in this connection. An important example is formed by the characterization of the different geometrical disciplines. According to F. Klein, they can be envisaged as
the theories of those properties which remain invariant, relative to
various types of transformation. Consequently, the concept formation,
and thus the construction, of topology can be characterized by saying
that geometrical entities are considered identical (e.g., two drawn figures
are considered represcntations of "the same" state of affairs), if they are
homomorphic; we have a corresponding case in projective geometry,
if they are in projective relation; correspondingly, in a metric geometry,
if they are similar; lastly, in a nonexistent discipline, which corresponds
to topography but is purely geometrical, we would call two figures identical if they are congruent. (The dcsignation, homonlorphism, projective
relation, similarity, and congruence, are generally applied only to entities of the same system, but not to two arbitrarily chosen figures; thus,
we would have to say, more precisely: "if the figures are of such a
nature that they would have the relation of homomorphism, etc., if they
were brought into a system".)

160. The Essence of the Psychological, Physical, and Cultural
Object Types
Let us again briefly summarize how the nature of the most important
different object types and their distinctions can be characterized on the

t

I

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPIIICAL PROBLEMS

1 255

basis of the constructional system. This is of fundamental importance for
the problems which are to be considered subsequently. In order to omit
unnecessary detail, we shall not, at this point, take into consideration the
distinctions within the main object types. Thus, for each object type, we
consider only the most important representative. Of the autopsychological object type, we consider the experiences, their individual constituents, and the qualities (of sense impressions, emotions, volitions,
etc.). Of the physical object type, we consider the physical things. Of
the heteropsychological objects, we consider again experiences, their
individual constituents, and the qualities; of the cultural objects, we
consider the primary cultural objects and general higher-level objects.
The constructional system shows that all objects can be constructed
from "my elementary experiences" as basic elements. In other words
(and this is what is meant by the expression "to construct"), all
(scientific) statements can be transformed into statements about my
experiences (more precisely, into statements about relations between my
experiences) where the logical value is retained. Thus, each object which
is not itself one of my experiences, is a quasi object; I use its name as a
convenient abbreviation in order to speak about my experiences. In fact,
within construction thcory, and thus within rational science, its name is
nothing but an abbreviation. Whether, in addition, it also designates
something which "exists by itself" is a question of metaphysics which has
no place in science (cf. S 8 161 and 176).
The a~4topsychologicalobjects (that is to say, the most important ones
which have been mentioned above) are in part my experiences themselves, in part classes of such experiences, which have been formed with
the aid of the basic relation(s); in part, they are relation extensions of
those experiences and these classes; thus, they are my experiences themselves and auxiliary expressions (quasi objects) of the next higher levels.
The physical objects are four-dimensional orders of qualities (or of
numbers which represent the qualities); thus, they are classes of my
experiences. The experiences are originally organized into classes and the
latter into fourfold systems of sequences; certain subsystems of the latter
are formed by the physical objects.
The heteropsychological objects consist of a new arrangement of the
autopsychological objects in relation to certain physical objects (namely,
my body and the bodies of other persons). Thus, they have in common
with the physical objects that they are orders of autopsychological
objects. However, the order of the autopsychological objects which leads
to the physical objects (namely, the above-mentioned fourfold system of

256

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTUAE OF THE WORLD

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICALPROBLEMS

I t

sequences) is very different from the order of the autopsychological
domain, while that particular order of autopsychological objects which
results in the heteropsychological objects has considerable similarity with
the order of the autopsychological objects themselvcs. This similarity,
though, does not hold for proximity in individual cases (namely, in the
time order), but it holds relative to the general laws of proximateness
within an order lZ5 (that is to say, it holds for the psychological laws of
a process in time).
The cultural objects are orders of heteropsychological (and, to a lesser
degree, also of autopsychological) objects, which are usually found
several levels higher up.

of a sign, not even o f an object sign. Thus, the indication of the essence
of an object or, what amounts to the same, the indication of the
nominatum of the sign of an object, consists in an indication of the
truth criteria for those sentences in which the sign of this object can
occur. Such criteria can be formulated in various different ways; these
various ways then indicate the respective character of the essence descrip
tion in question. If the constructional essence of an object is to be
indicated, the criterion consists in the construction formula of the object,
which is a transformation rule that allows us to translate step by step
every sentence in which the sign of the object occurs into sentences about
objects on a lower constructional level and, finally, into a sentence about
the basic relation(s) alone. Let us consider those pairs of experiences
for which the basic relation(s) hold(s) and which occur in the inventory
list of the basic relation(s) as an indication of the originally given states
of affairs; lZ8 then a criterion of the just-indicated kind consists in a
reduction of all sentences about the object whose constructional nature
we wish to ascertain, to such sentences as can be shown to be true or false
through the originally given states of affairs.
The earlier mentioned concept of an essential relation ( $ 20), which
plays a considerable role in discussions about problems of essence (especially in connection with the problems of causality and of psychophysical
parallelism) is related to the notion of metaphysical essence. An essential
relation cannot be given a place in the constructional system. Thus,
statements about such relations cannot be brought into a verifiable form.
Thus, science cannot ask questions concerning essential relations. Hence,
this concept is shown to belong to metaphysics.

16 1 . Constructional and Metaphysical Essence
The indicated answers to the quest after the nature of the various object
types are frequently felt to be unsatisfactory. They would be considered
unsatisfactory if the question were not concerned with constructional,
but with metaphysical, essence. If we ask for the constructional essence
of an object, we wish to know the constructional context of this object
within the system, especially how this object can be derived from the
basic objects. On the other hand, if someone asks for the metaphysical
essence of an object, he wishes to know what the object in question is in
itself. Such a question presupposes that the object does not only exist as
a certain constructional form, but also as an "object-in-itself", and this
characterizes the question as belonging to metaphysics. This is frequently
overlooked, and thus this same question is sometimes posed in science,
which is nonmetaphysical, and where such questions have neither justification nor meaning.
We must indicate still more precisely what is to be meant by the
constructional essence of an object. In science, we can, strictly speaking,
not speak about the essence of an object, not even about the constructional essence of an object, and thus we cannot raise any question concerning essence. An object has an essence, and an object name has a
nominatum, only in a certain improper sense, and thus the question
about the nominatum of a given object name is meaningful only in this
improper sense. Strictly speaking, the question should not be phrased as
"What is the nominatum of this object sign?", but "Which sentences in
which this object sign can occur are true?" We can make an unambiguous
assessment only of the truth or falsity of a sentence, not o f the nominatum

1 257

REFERENCES. Cf. Hertz [Einleitg.] 129 f., about the question concerning the "nature" of force or of electricity.

&

162. About Mind-Body Dualism
Are body and mind, the physical and the psychological, two different
substances (or principles or object types or aspects) of the world, or is
there only one substance (or object type, etc.)? (This problem of
dualism must be clearly distinguished from the actual "psychophysical
problem", namely, the problem of the mutual dependency relations between the physical and the psychological events, which shall be discussed
in more detail in the sequel [ $ $ 166-1691.) If we consider the indicated
ua

Ur-Sachverhalte

258

1

T H E LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

question from the viewpoint of construction theory, then the argument
for dualism would have to be phrased in roughly the following fashion.
Even though construction theory places emphasis upon the fact that, in
the formation of the constructional system, we proceed from a unified
basis, it must nevertheless construct various object types, especially the
physical and the psychological, in order to comprehend all objects of
science within the system. From this it follows (and this is the argument
for dualism) that, in spite of the unity of the basis, there are differences
between the object types, and especially there is an important difference
between the physical and the psychological. Against this, it must be said
that construction theory speaks of "object typcs" or generally of constructed "objects" only to make a concession to the realistic mode of
speech of the empirical sciences. Within the framework of construction
theory it would be more fitting to speak of order forms and their types.
When we are confronted with a monism-dualism problem within any
domain whatever, we must always clearly distinguish whether the question concerns the unity or multiplicity of that which is to be ordered or of
the order forms. Since there are in any case various different types of
order form, in fact, an arbitrarily large number of them, the question is of
import only relative to that which is to be ordered, i.e., relative to the
basic elements. If the question is posed in this form, we must decide it,
for the constructional system and thus for the monism-dualism problenl
of the physical and the psychological, in favor of monism; this results
from the uniformity of the basic elements of the system.
Let us illustrate this fact through an analogy. We observe the starred
sky at night; neither the moon nor clouds are visible, only stars. We can
undertake to distinguish and classify the stars; we notice various "object
types" which are distinguished according to type of light, brightness,
color. Hence, in this case, there are distinctions in that which is to be
ordered.
In contrast, let us now consider the (fictitious) case that only fixed
stars of equal brightness and color are visible. If we are now asked for
the number of object types, we would have to answer that we notice
objects of only one type. We would not become doubtful about the
justification of this answer if somebody were to object: "No, thcre are
quite a number of different object types which can be noticed: to begin
with, the stars themselves; secondly, the distances between any two stars;
third, the relations in size between any two distances; fourth, the triangles of any three stars; fifth, the overlapping relation between two
triangles; etc.; these object types are, in fact, entirely diffcrent from one
another: a distance is not a star; a relation between two distances is not

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 450

a distance; etc." Against this objection, we would reply that the enumer-

ated diEerent object types (exccpt for the stars themselves) are not
autonomous object types; they do not actually comprise objects, in the
proper sense of the word, which can be coordinated with the stars, but
only relations and relational structures among the stars. If we notice
any stars at all, we always notice them at definite places and thus distances, figures, and relations are necessarily given at the same time.
The question whether we notice one, two, or several types of object
cannot refer to the number of ascertainable types of such order forms
of the elements, for these order forms, as can be seen from the indicated five examples, are unlimited in number. Thus the question can
concern only the elements themselves.
The analogy of the stars (that is to say, the second case with the
propertyless stars which are connected only through relations) gives a
good picture of the intention of construction theory: all objects of the
empirical sciences (except for the elementary experiences themselves,
which correspond to the stars) are constellations of stars, together with
their relations and connections, which are formed from propertyless, but
orderable, stars. The differences between the so-called object types,
especially the difference between the physical and the psychological,
merely indicate different types of constellation (or their connections)
which are due to diierent modes of organization.
Let us now apply the insights which we have gained from the example
to the monism-dualism problem; we see that the physical and the psychological must not be envisaged as two principles or aspects of the world.
They are order forms of the one, unified domain of elements which are
propertyless and merely connected through relations. There is an unlimited number of such order forms. If we were to claim that the difference between the physical and the psychological amounts to a difference
between two substances or aspects of the world, then we should not stop
with these two forms. In science, even today, there is already a considerable number of object types which have the same independence and
thus the same claim to be considered essential aspects of the world. The
old metaphysical problem of dualism is restricted to the physical and the
psychological only because science recognized the independence of these
two object types, more precisely, constructional forms, first. In the
meantime, other object types (especially the cultural objects, the biological objects, and the values) have been recognized as independent,
8v2n though the equality of their status with that of the physical and the
psychohgical objects is at the moment still debated (cf. also the ex-

280

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

amples of further object types in $ 25). But even this enumeration of
object types mentions too few, since each of them comprises objects on
various constructional levels, as has been shown in the sketch of the
constructional system. This aggregation is useful for a rough classification, but we must not overlook the fact that the objects on the different
levels belong to different object spheres ( $ $ 41, 29) and thus belong to
logically totally separate and independent domains. Thus, in the h a l
analysis, it turns out that dualism is an arbitrary restriction to two
important, but not fundamentally preeminent object domains. As a thesis
concerning the fundamental constitution of the world, it is certainly not
tenable but has to give way to a pluralism which recognizes in the world
an unlimited number of aspects o r substances. But these would then
merely be the unlimited number of possible forms of ordering the
elements on the basis of their basic relation(s). The result remains the
same; in the world of cognizable objects, there are indeed (as in any
domain, if it can be ordered at all) an unlimited number o f order forms,
but only one uniform type of element which is to be ordered.
REFERENCES. In the opinion of Natorp, whose conception is
related to ours, this rejection of psychophysical dualism goes back to
Kant. Natorp says [Psychol.] 148, that, according to Kant, ""matter",
namely, the sensations of the inner and outer sense, are one and the
same and are distinguished only through the "form", i.e., their mode of
ordering." Natorp gives some further historical remarks and systematic
discussions concerning the problems just treated. Moreover, our position agrees with that of Russell [Mind], where a bibliography to this
problem is found (p. 22 ff.); he derives his position from William
James and mentions especially the behaviorists. Another, but related,
formulation is found in Ziehen ([Erkth.] 19 f., 43 ff. [Gegenw. Stand]
66 ff. "Binomism"). Russell ([Mind] 287 ff.) speaks of the physical
and the psychological as two types of regularities for the same elements.
The formulation of Mach ([Anal.] 14, [Erk.] 18) that there are different
directions of investigation relative to the same matter is likewise related
to the given position.

163. The Problem o f the Self
The "self" is the clars o f elementary experiences. It is frequently and
justly emphasized that the self is not a bundle of representations, or
experiences, but a unit. This is not in opposition to our thesis, for (as we
have shown in ยง 37 and have emphasized repeatedly) a class is not a
collection, or the sum, or a bundle of its elements, but a unified expression for that which the elements have in common.

1

261

The existence of the self is not an originally given fact.lZ7The sum
does not follow from the cogito; it does not follow from "I experience" that "I am", but only that an experience is. The self does not
belong to the expression of the basic experience at all, but is constructed
only later, essentially for the purpose of delineation against the "others";
that is, only on a high constructional level, after the construction of the
heteropsychological. Thus, a more fitting expression than "I experience"
would be "experience" or, still better, "this experience". Thus, we ought
to replace the Cartesian dictum by "this experience; therefore this experience is", and this is of course a mere tautology. The self does not
belong to the original state of affairs ( $ 65), as we have already indicated
during the discussion of the autopsychological basis. Philosophical
introspection lZs has led philosophers of various persuasions to the same
result, namely, that the original processes of consciousness must not be
envisaged as the activities of an acting subject, the "self".
REFERENCES. Not "1 think, but "it thinks within me", says Russell [Mind] 18, and we would, just as Lichtenberg (according to Schlick
[Erkenntnisl.] 147 f.) strike out the "within me". A similar denial of
activity in the original state of affairs is found in Nietzsche millel
8 8 304, 309; Avenarius [Kritik]; Natorp [Psychol.] 41 ff.; Driesch [Ordnungsl.]; Schlick [Erkenntnisl.] 147 f. Cf. also the bibliography in 8 65.
Where the mistaken cleavage of the original state of affairs into self
and object leads is shown in Nikolai Hartmann [Metaphysik] 38, 40,
where a distinction is finally made, not only between two, but between
four, layers, namely, subject, object, object image, and the transobjective.

k

164. The Nature of the Intention Relation
The intention relation holds between a content-possessing psychological
process and its content, for example, between my present representation
of the cathedral of Cologne and this building as the content of my
representation, or that which is "intended". Thus, the domain of the
relation comprises the "intending" psychological processes, such as perceptions, representations, emotions (if they are related to something),
etc., which are directed toward something. We leave open the debated
question whether all psychological processes belong in this category; that
is, whether they are all "intentional". Now, if the intention relation
lZ7

Ur-Sachverhalt
Selbstbesinnung

262

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

holds, for example, between a given perceptual experience of a tree and
the intended tree, then by the "intended tree" we mean initially the tree
"that is represented in the perception"; thus, it could also be a tree in a
dream or a hallucination. Now, whether it is such an unreal tree or
whether there is a real tree that corresponds to the intended tree, is a
secondary question which is of no concern for the immediate character
of the experience.
Now, the customary conception of the intention relation holds that
such intending psychological events refer, in a peculiar way, to something
beyond themselves, namely, to their "intended" or "meant" object,
which is different from them. It is consequently held that the relation is
of a special sort and cannot be reduced to anything else. What is correct
in this conception is only that the experience and its intended object are
not identical. But the intention relation is not a relation o f a unique kind
which can be found nowhere but between a psychological entity and
that which is represented in it. For, from the viewpoint of construction
theory, the intended tree is a certain, already very complicated ordering
of experiences, namely, of those experiences of which we say that the
tree is their intended object; now, these experiences are units which
cannot be analyzed, but can merely be brought into different orders, in
this case, into an order which represents the intended tree. From this
we can see the following: the intention relation holds generally between
an experience and an order of experiences, if the following two conditions are fulfilled: first, the experience must belong to this order; second,
this order must be one of those constructional forms in which realtypical objects are constructed. ("Real-typical" objects are those objects
for which a distinction between real and nonreal is meaningful, even
before this distinction has been madc [$ 1721. This agrees with the fact
that, so far as the intentional object is concerned, it is not yet necessary
to decide the question of reality.)
The relation between an element and a relational structure of a certain
sort in which it has a place is one of the most important relations of the
applied theory of relations. The intention relation is nothing but a subclass of this relation, namely, the relation between an experience (or
constituent of an experience) and an ordcr which has a real-typical
structure. Actually, there is no objection if such a relation is formulated
as "reference to something outside itself", as long as it is made clear that
the expression "outside" means that the intentional object is not identical
with the experience or, more precisely, that the experience stands in a
more comprehensive context.

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

/

263

EXAMPLES. Let us mention some examples of the indicated general
relation in other areas; in these cases, we can also use the expression of
"referring". A given plant refers to the botanical system of plants, a
given hue to the color solid, a person refers to his family, his state, or
his occupational hierarchy, etc.
The intention relation belongs to the same type as the relations in the
indicated examples. Of course, if a tree occurs in one of our experiences,
we are usually conscious that this tree is intended, while we do not, as a
rule, think of the color solid whenever we are aware of a color. But this
is only a difference in degree; consciousness of the tree can occasionally
be lacking, although this is rarely the case in an adult person. However,
if one says that it lies in the essence of an experience to refer intentionally to something, even if one is not in each experience conscious of
its intended object, then it must be replied that, from the viewpoint of
construction theory, this holds quite generally; it is essential to each
object that it belongs to certain order contexts; otherwise, it could not
even be constructed, that is, could not exist as an object of cognition.
REFERENCES. The traditional theory of intentionality stems from
Brentano and has been continued by Husserl [Phanomenol.] 64ff.
Our position agrees essentially with that of Russell [Mind]. It is
closely related to that of Jacoby ([Ontol.] 258 ff.), according to which
we are here concerned with the overlapping of two systematic orders,
namely, the system of consciousness and some other system, for example, the system of external reality. Jacoby puts justifiable emphasis on
the fact that, through this insight, the "duplication of entities in the
external world into appearance and the thing-in-itself" becomes superfluous and is disregarded (p. 257).

165. The Nature of Causality
There are certain laws in the perceptual world which supplement the
construction of this domain to a considerable degree and without which
the construction of a large part of this domain would not even be possible. These laws have the form of implications between assignments to
pairs of places or place areas which have a certain relation to one
another in the order of places. It will be recalled that events in the
perceptual world are represented by four-dimensional areas of world
points, tc which (in part) qualities are assigned (cf. the construction of
the perceptual world, $ $ 125 f., 133 f.). Hence, such a law has the
following form: "If qualities are assigned to the world points of a

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WOALD

264

(four-dimensional) area in such and such a way, then qualities of such
and such a kind are assigned, or must be assigned, to the world points
of another area whose location stands in such and such a relation to the
location of the first area." If the two areas which are thus connected
through implication are simultaneous, we are concerned with a state
law; lZ9 i f they follow one another, with a process law.130If the two fourdimensional a.reas are in proximity, then we have a proximity law.131In
the case of a state law, we have spatial proximity; in the case of a process
law, temporal proximity. In this latter case (process law with temporal
proximity), the law is called a causal law. Of the two four-dimensional
areas which are in temporal proximity, i.e., which follow one another,
and between which the dependency obtains, we call the earlier one the
cause of the latter, while this latter area is called the eflect of the former.
Thus, within science, causality means nothing but a functional dependency of a certain sort. We must emphasize this because time and
again the opinion is advanced that, aside from the functional dependency
between the two events, there must be a "real" relation or "essential
relation", namely, such that the first event "produces", "generates", or
"brings about", the second. It is strange that the opinion is still held, even
by physicists and epistemologists, that science, in this case, physics, must
not rest content with an investigation of those functional dependencies,
but that it should ascertain, above all, the "real causes".
The error which lies in this opinion becomes even clearer if we consider, not the perceptual world, but the purely quantitative world of
physics, with which physics is after all concerned. In the world of physics*
one cannot even speak of events which stand to one another in the relation of cause and effect. The concepts "cause" and "effect" are
meaningful only within the perceptual world; thus, they are infected with
the imprecision which attaches to concept formations within this world.
Actually, the process laws of the world of physics, i.e., the causal laws
of physics, do not speak of a dependency between events, but of a
dependency between a state and a certain limiting value relative to the
assignment of state magnitudes 132 (namely, the temporal differentia1
quotient of a state magnitude). It is only these causal laws, and not those
of the perceptual world, which hold strictly and without exception. The
causal laws in the perceptual world do not hold strictly, but only as
Zustandsgesetz
Ablaufgesetz
131 Nachbarschaftsgesetz

lZ0
"O

lSZ Zustandsgrijssen

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

I

265

qualified by the vague clause "if no other circumstance intervenes."
Thus, if we speak of strict causal laws, we can mean only the physical
laws. But in this case, there is nothing present which could be called
"cause" and "effect" (for nobody will wish to call a momentary state
a "cause", let alone a differential quotient, an "effect"). Moreover, what
is meant here can certainly not be the essential relation called "bringing
about". We have frequently mentioned the metaphysical, extrascientific
character of essential relations. (Cf. also the general remarks concerning problems of essence at the end of $ 169, which also apply to the
problem of causality.)
REFHENCES. Since Hume, it has been said frequently and clearly
that, within science, "real causation" must be denied. (Let me here
only refer to Mach, Verworn [Kondit.], and Vaihinger [Als Obi.) ~ h
an explicit clarification from the standpoint of construction theory
seems superfluous; perhaps the clearest rebuttal was given by Russell
in his lecture [Cause].

~

~

,

gl a
3 8 o
0

Ir;

,o 83 R
g $w- 3?-?R-

00

ZE.8 8

&.g. -8 aG
ti'

,it"

g.
"" "
C;.eb
2

-"

2%

g,m

e

0

w
g -K

g 8.t"25

2 ;Y

* C K

E2 5

V

O
3

b ;.g

2 5.
g;

g

s?!?

268

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

his expressive motions). Of course, we draw conclusions concerning the
sequence of psychological events from the second sequence of physical
events. But, what we observe are two physical sequences which show a
certain complicated parallelism, but a parallelism which is in principle
no more problematic than any other parallelism between physical processes. At any rate, this is not a situation in which the state of affairs in
question is, as such, observed.
To facilitate understanding, we have represented the situation in realistic language. If we use constructional language, it is even more clearly
evident that it is in principle impossible to observe the basic state of
affairs of the psychophysical problem in another person. The two parallel
sequences are constructed, on one hand, as a sequence of physical events
in the body of another person, and, on the other hand, as a sequence of
heteropsychological events which are constructionally assigned to this
body. But the assignment of heteropsychological phenomena to the
body of another person consists in assigning autopsychological events
solely according to the physical behavior of this body. It is trivial and
requires no further explanation that, in this case, we have a parallelism
between the physical events of this body and the values which have been
assigned. T o pose the psychophysical problem from the vantage point
of the heteropsychological would be very much like the following: somebody has accustomed himself to envisage an angry Zeus whenever he
hears thunder. Eventually, he poses the question of how it could be explained that Zeus's anger and the thunder always occur simultaneously.

168. The Basic Situation of the Psychophysical Problem
Since the basic situation of the psychophysical problem has nothing to
do with the heteropsychological, it must be related to the autopsych*
logical. Therefore, in order to produce appropriate conditions, I have
to observe my own brain through the brain mirror. In order to simplify
the situation as much as possible, let us assume that auditory ~erceptions
take place in such a way that they attract the main attention (while the
visual observations through the brain mirror are only made on the side).
The auditory perceptions could be produced by creating certain physical conditions, for example, by having a music box play a melody. But
then we encounter a diiculty which corresponds precisely to the one
discussed in connection with the heteropsychological experiment: I see
brain events and I hear the tones of a music box; thus, we have a g d
a purely physical parallelism. Thus, let us assume, instead, that I merely

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

I

269

vividly imagine the melody. Here, now, we have really the desired situation: in imagination, I hear a melody, or, better, the same melody over
and over (psychological sequence), and at the same time, I observe in
the brain mirror my brain events (physical sequence); the pardelism
shows itself in the fact that the same brain event always occurs during
the same phase of the melody.
Let us consider the just-described basic situation from the constructional point of view. We find that the following state of affairs obtains.
There is a temporal sequence of elementary experiences. If we carry out
a constructional analysis of these experiences into their constituents
(more precisely, into their quasi constituents), it becomes evident that
there is a parallelism between two sequences of constituents; in each
experience of the sequence of experiences, there is one constituent from
each of the two constituent sequences; two constituents which occur
together once will occur together again if one or the other of them occurs.
The occurrence of two sequences of constituents of experiences which
are connected with one another in such a way, we wish to call generally
parallelism of constituents. Such a parallelism can occur, as we shall see,
between the most heterogeneous sequences of constituents. In the case
of the basic situation here under discussion, the parallelism of the constituents has the peculiarity that the constituents of one of the sequences
(visual perceptions) can be used for the construction of real physical
objects, while the constituents of the other sequence (auditory representations) cannot be used in this way; rather, the latter can be of any
There are also parallelisms of a different sort. Parallelisms between
two sequences of constituents, both of which can be used for the construction of physical objects, occur frequently.

EXAMPLES. Parallelism between different sense modalities; (in
physical-realistic language) : when a body visibly vibrates in a certain
way, it simultaneously emits a certain sound; when a body has a certain
visual shape, then it has simultaneously an analogous tactile shape.
Parallelism within the same sense modality is also frequent; if a body
has the visual shape of a horse, then it has simultaneously one of the
horse colors; if part of a body has the visual shape of a horse head, then
the entire body has simultaneously the visual shape of a horse.
Furthermore, there are parallelisms between two sequences of constituents, neither of which can be used for the construction of real physical objects, but (either for the construction of unreal physical objects

270

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

or) only (as all sequences of constituents) for the construction of psychological objects.
EXAMPLE. (In physical-realistic language): if I have the representation (not the perception) of the visual shape of a rose, then I
have simultaneously the representation of the color and the fragrance
of a rose; if I have the representation of the taste of an apple, then I
simultaneously have a feeling of pleasure.

169. Constructional and Metaphysical Problem
The indicated parallelism, which takes place in the basic situation of the
psychophysical problem, is distinguished from the other examples of parallelism only by the fact that one of the sequences of constituents can be
used for the construction of physical objects, while the second sequence
may be utilizable,for the construction of physical objects, but does not
have to be. From the viewpoint of construction theory, this is not an
essential difference. The inherent nature of the given does not allow us
to make essential distinctions between experiences or between constituents of experiences, especially not on the basis of the fact that constituents of one sort can be ordered in a certain way, while others can
be ordered only in other ways. Thus, from the viewpoint of construction
theory, the discernment of that basic situation does not offer anything
new. It is only another case o f the frequently occurring parallelism of
sequences of constituents. It offers no more problems than this parallelism offers in general. Many more examples of such parallelisms could
be mentioned, none of them any less problematic. The indicated cases,
including the psychophysical situation, pose the problem: how can the
occurrence of a parallelism of sequences of constituents be explained?
For construction theory, and thus also for (rational) science, the only
thing to be done here is to ascertain what is the case, namely, that it is
not only the case that the given can be ordered in some way or another,
but that it can be ordered to such an extent and in such a way that
parallel sequences of this sort can be constructionally produced. The
quest for an explanation of these findings lies outside the range of science; this shows itself already in the fact that this question cannot be
expressed in concepts that can be constructed; for the concepts, "interpretation", "explanation", "basis", do not in this sense have any place
in a constructional system of objects of cognition. (This holds for any
such constructional system and not only for a constructional system of

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1

271

our specific kind.) Rather, the quest for an explanation of that parallelism belongs within metaphysics.
It is a familiar fact that metaphysics explains the parallelisms of the
first kind through realistic or phenomenalistic postulations of physical
things-in-themselves; it is one and the same thing which on one hand
appears to me as the visual thing, apple, and on the other hand as the
taste thing, apple. Parallelisms of the second kind can be explained
through analogous postulations of psychological realities; it is one and
the same psychological entity which is, on one hand, the representation
of an apple and which carries with it, on the other hand, a certain emotional quality. Thus in both cases the metaphysical explanation makes
use of a reification (positing as real) or a substantialization (in the
sense of the category of substance). In a similar way, the parallelism of
the third kind, the one that occurs in the psychophysical basic situation,
can be explained through reification of things-in-themselves which have
two different types of property.
To the extent to which it is necessary and possible for science, the
psychophysical problem can be clarified in the indicated way on the
basis of construction theory. The given suggestions must here suffice.
Of course, this clarification does not go beyond the indicated state of
affairs; but this does not mean that there is a gap in science: a question
which goes further cannot even be formulated within science (i.e., formulated with scientific, that is to say, constructable, concepts, cf. ยง 180).
Aside from the psychophysical relation, we have noticed earlier certain other relations between different object types, each of which gives
rise to a correlation problem as well as to an essence problem (ยง Q 20, 21,
24). In a manner similar to that used for the psychophysical problem,
we could also show for these other problems that they can be posed in
constructional language only as correlation problems. Their solutions,
in these cases, are certain functional dependencies. On the other hand,
if they are envisaged as essence problems, then they belong to the
domain of metaphysics. This holds especially, for example, for the intention relation (cf. ยง 164), the causal relation (cf. ยง 165), and the
manifestation and documentation relations among cultural objects.
REFERENCES. It was especially Mach [Anal.] who emphasized that
in science we can ask only for functional dependencies, not for "essential relations". At present, this view is frequently argued by thinkers he
has influenced.
Dingler [Naturphil.] 158 ff., also tries a solution to the psychophysical
problem with the aid of the thought experiment, where the "brain mir-

272

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

ror" is used relative to one's own brain, but shortly before the nicely
prepared solution, he goes astray: he believes that the simultaneity between the picture in the brain mirror and the corresponding conscious
event cannot be established because of the loss of time in the transmission through the apparatus. However, this time difference is not essential for the problem; moreover, it does not occur if the phenomena in
question are static or periodic.

CHAPTER

C
THE CONSTRUCTIONAL OR EMPIRICAL
PROBLEM OF REALITY

170. Real and Nonreal Physical Objects
The only concept of reality which occurs in the empirical sciences we
shall call the empirical concept o f reality. It is this concept which distinguishes a geographically determined mountain from a legendary or a
dreamed mountain, and an experienced emotion from a simulated one.
The question as to what is real, when it is formulated with the aid of
constructable concepts, can only be concerned with this empirical reality;
it alone can be posed and treated within the constructional system;
hence, we speak here of the "constructional" or "empirical" problem of
reality, in contrast to the "metaphysical" problem of reality which will
be discussed in the sequel ( 8 175 ff.), when we shall be concerned with
a m e r e n t , a "metaphysical", concept of reality. This latter concept
occurs only in traditional philosophy, not in the empirical sciences.
T o begin with, we consider the concept of (empirical) reality as it
relates to physical objects, in particular to the most important objects,
namely, physical bodies. These bodies are called real if they are constructed as classes of physical 138 points which are located on connected
bundles of world lines and are placed within the all-comprehending fourdimensional system of the space-time world of physics ( ยง 136). On the
133

physikalisch

274

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE W O R t D

other hand, things which, taken by themselves, have the same or a similar constitution as the real physical bodies, i.e., which are also fourdimensional orders of world points with physical 133 assignments, but
which are not parts of the one, comprehensive, four-dimensional system
of the world of physics, are called also "physical" since they have a
similar constitution, but, since they do not belong to the total systcm,
they are called nonreal physical things.
The construction of nonreal physical things can take place in various
M e r e n t ways. Generally speaking, the construction of physical things,
including the real ones, leaves it initially open whether they are real or
nonreal; this decision will be made only afterward depending on the
possibility of placing them in the total system. This holds already for
the world of perception, which is a preliminary to the world of physics.
EXAMPLE. On the basis of a number of visual perceptions alone,
we do not generally carry out an assignment to the world points of the
fourdiiensional system, according to the rules of 1 126 ff.; rather, we
establish initially a special, four-dimensional order of the colors in
question which could represent a visual thing during a span of time.
We must now test whether or not this visual thing can be placed in the
system of the perceptual world according to the constructional forms
of this system. If it can he so placed without producing a contradiction
with the other constructions of perceptual things, where the assertions
of other persons are frequently decisive factors, then it is legitimized
as a real perceptual thing (i.e., initially, as a visual thing). If it cannot
be so placed, then it is a nonreal perceptual thing.

In constructing a nonreal thing, we can decide, through a more detailed investigation, what kind of nonreal physical thing it is. If a visual
thing (as in the indicated example) is constructed from visual percep
tions, then it could perhaps be a dream, a hallucination, an hypnotic
suggestion, etc. On the other hand, if the construction takes place on the
basis of assertions of other persons ( $ 114), then, depending upon the
circumstances (i.e., the "intention" of the other), it could be a lie, a
piece of fiction, an error, etc. (of another). However, construction can
also form a physical thing in a free way, relying neither upon the experiences of the self nor upon the assertions of others. Here the object must
be called an object of one's own phantasy, whose purpose wuld be (one's
own) lie, invention, theoretical fiction, hypothetical assumption, or free
play of phantasy.
13s

physikalisch

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 275

The given suggestions will suffice to make it clear that the diflerence
between reality and nonreality (dream, invention, etc.) retains its full
meaning even in a constructional system which is based upon an autopsychological basis, and that this distinction in no way presupposes any
transcendency.

171. Real and Nonreal Objects of Psychological and Cultural T y p e
For object types other than physical objects, we must envisage the difference between real and nonreal objects in much the same way as for
physical objects. An object is called "psychological" if it is constituted
in such a way that, taken by itself and according to its internal structure,
it has the constitution of events or states that are normally called autopsychological, no matter whether this object is based on my own experiences, the assertions of others, or free stipulation. If, in addition, it can
be placed within the connected and temporally ordered system of autopsychological objects, then it is called a real autopsychological object.
If an object can be assigned to another person, who is a real physical
object in the just-discussed sense, in accordance with the constructional
forms appropriate to the heteropsychological ( $ 140), then we call it
a real heteropsychological object. If no placement is possible in either
of these ways, then it is called a nonreal psychological object. We must
here again distinguish, just as we did above, between a dream, a lie, etc.
For cultural objects, the distinction is logically even more simple
(though empirically more difficult). An object which is constructed in
such a way that, taken by itself, it has the constitution of those objects
which we have called cultural, is in each case called a cultural object,
whether it be real or not. I t is called real if its manifestations belong to
the real psychological objects; otherwise, it is called nonreal. The application of this criterion is simple in the case of those objects which are
constructed as primary cultural objects. It becomes more complicated
for the higher cultural objects, because, in these cases, we must consider
the reality or nonreality of the primary cultural objects which lie at their
basis. I do not wish to go into any more detail in this matter.
Through a comparison of these distinctions in the areas of the physical, the psychological, and the cultural, we find that, throughout, the
following properties are used as indicators to distinguish the real from
the nonreal.
1. Every real object belongs to a comprehensive system which is governed by regularities; that is to say, the physical objects belong to the

276

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

world of physics, the psychological objects to the psychological system
of a subject, and the cultural objects belong to the cultural world.
2. Every real object is either itself an intersubjective object or the
immediate occasion for the construction o f such an object. The latter we
can say of an object which belongs to the field 134 of intersubjective
correspondence ( ยง 146 f . ) .
3. Every real object has a position in the temporal order.

172. The Concept of Real-Typical Objects
More difficult than the just-discussed differentiation between real and
nonreal objects is the distinction between objects which are either real
o r nonreal, on the one hand, and objects to which this distinction does
not apply, on the other; the former we call real-typical.
As we have seen above, the real and nonreal objects of an object
domain agree in several properties; these, then, are the characteristic
properties of the real-typical in the domain in question; we shall now
consider them in more detail. For example, if a physical object has the
properties common to real and nonreal physical objects, then it is a
real-typical physical object. It may then happen that we recognize it as
a real object o r as a nonreal object, but it is also possible that this distinction has not yet been carried out or perhaps that it cannot be carried
out on the basis of the available information. Nevertheless, we can know
of it that it is real-typical.
REFERENCES. The concept of the real-typical is called by Christiansen [Kantkritik] "empirical objectivity". "What must be the nature
of an object, that we may ask of it whether or not it is real?'In Christiansen's opinion, Kant actually means real-typical objects when he
speaks of "objccts". Meinong, in his theory of objects, calls the realtypical objects "real".

The concept of reality is not yet a scientificaIIy determined concept.
Its boundaries are not drawn according to uniform principles, but are
in part merely traditional, i.e., objectively speaking, merely accidental
(just like the historical boundaries of a state). But (in contrast to the
boundaries of a state) these boundaries are not uniquely determined.
In the following, we attempt a rough determination of the boundaries
of the real-typical in the various domains. In doing so, we shall conform
to linguistic usage as it obtains in science and after the clarifying influGeltungsbereich

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 277

ence of scientific thinking also in daily life. But this use of language is
frequently quite fluctuating.
In order to find, for a certain object domain, the boundary between
real-typical objects and those that are not, let us, for the sake of simplicity, confine ourselves to the comprehensive system of those domains
for which we have succeeded in distinguishing the real objects from the
nonreal ones ( 3 171) : the world of physics (as a whole), the psychological world (as a whole), or the cultural world (as a whole).
According to the indicated criteria of reality, the real-typical objects,
if they occur within such a system, are real. Thus, if we limit ourselves
to such a system, then the desired boundary of the real-typical coincides
with the boundary of the real. It is permissible to make this restriction
since the boundary of the real-typical, outside of such a system, is analogous to the boundary inside.

173. The Boundary of the Real-Typical in the Physical Domain
Let us, to begin with, find the boundary between the real-typical and
the other objects for the physical object type. In doing so, we shall limit
ourselves to the total system of the world of physics, within which the
real-typical objects are the same as the real ones. The following discussion does not so much have the purpose of ascertaining the precise course
of the boundary; rather, it is to show that this boundary is rather arbitrary and frequently vacillating.
T o begin with, and according to general linguistic usage, physical
bodies (which belong to the system) must be called real. From this it
follows for our problem that the physical bodies, whether real or not,
are real-typical. But, even here, doubts are possible in some cases (for
example, in the case of a virtual optical picture). However, greater dificulties arise in another direction: we now have to ask which physical
objects, other than bodies, may be called real. It is common linguistic
usage to call the events in, and the states of, these bodies real. To a large
extent, this holds also for the sensory-qualitative properties, although
here we already h d some deviation. However, for the wholes which are
composed out of bodies, the differences in language use occur with more
frequency; here we are concerned with those body-like objects which
Consist of bodies as their spatial parts, but which do not themselves
have to be spatially connected (cf. P 36, about the concept of whole). If
the individual bodies which form the whole are spatially close together,
then we frequently call the whole real and sometimes even call it itself a

278

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE W O m D

body (for example, a pile of sand, a forest). If the individual bodies are
spatially farther separated from one another, then the whole is more likely
to be called real, the more similar the individual bodies are to one another.
EXAMPLES. "My furniture", "the German coal reserves", will generally be admitted to be physical objects. On the other hand, there will
already be doubts concerning an object such as "the present vegetation
of central Europe" (meaning the whole, whose parts are the presently
living, individual plants). The object, whose parts are certain trees, may
or may not be called real, depending upon the characteristic properties
of the trees: if the trees are close together, then the object is called a
forest or a part of a forest, and there is hardly any doubt; if, on the
other hand, we are concerned with the oaks of Europe, or with all
trees in Europe which are higher than twenty meters, or with the European trees the name of whose owners begins with an A, then it becomes
more and more likely that the object is no longer considered real, but a
more or less arbitrary "conceptual assemblage" without a "real" object
which "lies at the bottom of it".
Classes of bodies (about the distinction between class and whole, cf.
$ 37) are not as frequently considered real as wholes which consist of
bodies. This is justified inasmuch as these classes are much more clearly
distinguished from bodies, since they belong to another object sphere,
whiie the whole belongs to the same object sphere as the bodies themselves. But, even here, the boundary does not take a simple and clear
course. There are classes of bodies which are frequently considered real,
namely, those whose characteristic property can be perceived through
the senses or is in some other way considered easily recognizable and
important. This coincides with what has been said above about properties, for a property of physical bodies is, as a rule, to be constructed
as the class of those things which have this property.
EXAMPLE. Physical substances are frequently called real, for example, the substance gold as the class of all pieces of gold (in contradistinction to the corresponding whole which is the total amount of gold
in the world).
Linguistic usage is even more vacillating in the case of relation extensions of physical bodies.
EXAMPLES. The relation extension which is characterized by one
body pushing another is generally considered real. Occasionally, the
spatial distance between two bodies is thought of as something real, but*
sometimes, it is considered merely to hold for real bodies and to be

.&
mfb
w

' *.

ai-

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1

279

purely conceptual. This latter conception is even more marked in the
case of the temporal distance between two body states and perhaps
even more in the case of those relations between bodies which are based
upon qualitative likeness or similarity.
Let us now proceed from classes to classes of classes and to relations lZ6
between classes and from relations lS6 to classes of relations la5 and to
relations 135 between relations 136; such objects are generally no longer
called real. But there are exceptions even among these objects which are
two (or more) levels higher than bodies; even here, there are certain
objects which are occasionally considered real. This is an especially good
indication of the arbitrary and accidental boundary of the concept of
the real-typical. (Incidentally, on these levels, linguistic usage fluctuates
even with respect to the expression "physical".)
EXAMPLE. The relation 135 between one generation of animals and
their immediate offspring is a relation la6 between classes of physical
bodies. One finds occasionally, though not generally, that this relation 135
of parent generation is considered real.

174. The Boundary of the Real-Typical in the Psychological and
the Cultural Domains
In the domain of psychological objects, common usage draws the boundary of the real-typical in a somewhat less arbitrary way than in the case
of the physical objects. Generally, only experiences and the individual
constituents of experiences are considered real (or nonreal, as the case
may be). To these are added unconscious constituents of experiences,
if they are constructed as a supplementation of the conscious ones
(1 132). Occasionally, one of the senses of a certain person is considered as something real (for example, the visual sense of Mr. N); this
is done less often with a given quality class (for example, a certain
blue hue, not as it is perceived on a particular occasion, but generally).
In the case of relation extensions of experiences or of constituents of
experiences, the boundary shows considerable fluctuation, just as in the
case of the physical.
In the domain of the cultural objects, we find the boundary in an even
worse condition than in the preceding two cases. Here, it is not only the
case that the boundary is frequently rather erratic from a given viewpoint, but it also shows great differences between different points of
18%elation

280

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE O F THE WORLD

view. Oftentimes, reality is denied to the entire domain, as if all the
cultural objects were only "conceptual assemblages". However, if some
cultural objects are considered real, then the boundary can be drawn
on very daerent levels and may frequently include only a part of the
objects on certain levels. The domain of the cultural objects shows a
very large number of levels; thus, here there are many more possibilities for varying the boundary. Linguistic usage actually expresses many
of these possibilities and thus shows very little uniformity. This can be
explained mainly through the fact that the domain of the cultural has
been recognized and accepted as an independent object domain only
very recently.
We have here considered the concept of the real-typical, not from a
substantive or systematic point of view, but only relative to linguistic
usage. Here we merely find a disjointed concept which is not clearly
delineated. The boundaries of this concept are subject to a certain degree
of arbitrariness. It is reasonable to assume that the variations which we
find here are caused mainly by subjective dispositions relative to the
experiences, and by variations in interest. The terminological situation
which we have described shows that it is necessary to make a clear and
uniform determination of this boundary; that is to say, to determine with
which concepts the distinction between real and nonreal is to be made
at all. The purpose of our discussion is, mainly, to show that we are here
not concerned with a question of fact, but with (the lack of) a convention. Furthermore, the discussion has the purpose of showing the urgent
need for such a convention.

CHAPTER

THE METAPHYSICAL PROBLEM
OF REALITY

175. Realism, Idealism, and Phenomenalism
We now wish to deal with a problem of reality which is quite different
from the one that we have discussed so far. We have determined what
constructional (empirically ascertainable) conditions must be fulfilled
in order for an object to be called real in the customary usage of the empirical sciences. In addition to this "constructional" or "empirical" problem of reality, the question may arise whether or not we must ascribe
"reality" in a special sense to these empirically real objects. For this
special sense, there are various formulations; most commonly, it is
characterized as independence from the cognizing consciousness. Thus,
we have to differentiate two different meanings of the word "reality".
Wherever it is necessary, we shall indicate them by calling the one
"empirical reality" and the other "metaphysical reality". Later on we
shall give a justification for this second expression ( $ 176).
EXAMPLES. The difference between the two meanings becomes clear
through the following two questions: "Was the Trojan War a real event
or merely an invention?" and "Are those objects which are not feigned
or simulated, for example the perceived physical bodies, real, or are
they merely contents of consciousness?" The first question is treated by

282

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF T H E WORLD

historical science; it is to be resolved with empirical and constructional
methods, and hence there is no divergence of opinion among the adherents of the various philosophical schools. The second question is customarily transacted within the field of philosophy; it is answered in
different ways by different schools; we shall see later that it is extraconstructional and hence extrascientific; it is metaphysical.
REFERENCES. We customarily use the expressions "actual" 136
and "real" '37 as synonymous. Kiilpe [Realis.] distinguishes the postulated, inferred (i.e., constructed) objects from the processes of consciousness. He calls the former "real", and the latter "actual"; but this
seems a little too far removed from customary usage.

The second concept of reality (in the sense of independence from
the cognizing subject) indicates the point where the schools of realism,
idealism, and phenomenalism part company. These schools are distinguished from one another by the fact that they ascribe reality in the
second sense to object domains of varying extent (within the field of
the empirically real). Realism holds that the constructed physical and
heteropsychological objects are real. Subjective idealism holds that
the heteropsychological, but not the physical, objects are real. The
more radical form of solipsism denies even the reality of heteropsychological objects. (Objective idealism ascribes reality to a superindividual,
absolute subject, which is not constructed within our system; hence, we
shall not consider this school in the present context.) Phenomenalism
agrees with realism in maintaining that real entities exist outside of the
domain of the autopsychological; on the other hand, it agrees with idealism in denying this reality to the physical; according to phenomenalism,
reality must be ascribed to unrecognizable "things-in-themselves", whose
appearances are the physical objects.

176. The Metaphysical Concept o f Reality
The concept o f reality (in the sense o f independence from the cognizing consciousness) does not belong within (rational) science, but within
metaphysics. This is now to be demonstrated. For this purpose, we
investigate whether this concept can be constructed, i.e., whether it can
be expressed through objects of the most important types which we have
already considered, namely, the autopsychological, the physical, the
heteropsychological, and the cultural. At first sight, it might appear as
l"

wirklich
real

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 283

though this were possible. An object which I have recognized, that is,
an object which has been constructed on the basis of my experience,
will have to be called "independent of my consciousness7' if its constitution does not depend upon my will, i.e., if an act of volition which aims
at a change of the object does not result in such a change. But this does
not agree with the concept of reality as it is meant by realism and idealism (the former ascribing it to, and the latter denying it of, physical
bodies). For, according to the definition which we have just attempted,
a physical body which I hold in my hand should not be called real, since
(even in the opinion of the realists) it changes if I carry out an appropriate act of will; this would then be contradictory to the realistic position.
On the other hand, this definition requires that any physical thing which
lies outside of our technological reach, for example, a crater in the moon,
should be acknowledged as real, since (even in the opinion of idealism)
it does not change if I carry out an appropriate act of will; this then
would be contradictory to the position of idealism.
One could try in various other ways to give a definition of reality (in
the sense of independence of my consciousness) in such a way that the
concept becomes constructable. However, one can show in each such
case that the concept which is so defined does not agree with the concept
as it is meant by realism as well as by idealism. It must be noted that
this holds, not only of a constructional system which has the system form
represented in our outline, but for any experiential constructional system, even for a system which does not proceed from an autopsychological basis, but from the experiences of all subjects or from the physical.
The (second) concept of reality cannot be constructed in an experiential
constructional system; this characterizes it as a nonrational, metaphysical
concept.
REFERENCES. It seems that we agree with Russell [Scientif.] 120 ff.
in the indicated conception that the concept of nonempirical reality
cannot be constructed. However, this does not seem to be consistent
with the fact that, in Russell, questions of the following kind are frequently posed, which (independently of how they are answered) imply
a realistic persuasion: whether physical things exist when they are not
observed; whether other persons exist; whether classes exist; etc. ([Scientif.] 123, [Mind] 308, [External W.] 126, [Sense-Data] 157 and elsewhere). Cf. also Weyl [Handb.] 89.
The indicated conception of the concept of reality is related to that
of positivism, which goes back to Mach. Cf., for example, Ostwald
[Naturphil.] 101 ff.; the concept of reality as it is defined there roughly

284

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

corresponds to the constructional concept of reality. The same holds
for the concept of reality as it is defined by Bavink ([Ergebn.] 26, 187) ;
thus, Bavink is right when he describes it as neutral relative to the
realism problem.
The definition of the concept of a thing-in-itself goes back to the concept of reality (in the sense of independence from the cognizing subject).
Thus, in our conception, this concept, too, must be placed within metaphysics, for metaphysics is the extrascientific domain of theoretical form
( ยง 182).
REFERENCES. If things-in-themselves are defined as real objects
which are not given (as is done by Schlick [Erkenntnisl.] 179), then
they must indeed be counted among the cognizable objects and thus
must be placed within the domain of (rational) science and not within
metaphysics; for then they coincide with the constructed real objects.
However, it seems to us that this definition is not very practical, since it
deviates altogether too much from customary usage (cf. Kiilpe [Redis.]
11,213). The same holds also for the characterization of constructed real
objects as transcendent ([Erkenntnisl.] 180). The essential l i t of
transcendence, according to customary usage, lies between the recognizable (in our language, constructable) objects and the nonrecognizable (not constructable) objects. If one wishes to emphasize, through a
special expression, the limit between the given objects and those objects
which are constructed but not given, then the term "transgression"
("transgredient" or transgressive objects) may serve for this purpose;
this term has been introduced by Ziehen [Erkth.] 279; Ziehen justifiably makes a sharp distinction between this concept and the concept
of transcendence.

177. Construction Theory Contradicts Neither Realism, Idealism,
nor Phenomenalism
The following concerns objects which are empirically real (i.e., objects
which are (in constructional language) placed in the total system of the
object type in question; cf. 5 171; (in realistic language) objects which
have been "recognized" or "determined" as "real"). Relative to these
empirically real objects of the various object types, construction theory
and realism agree in the following points: 1. Such objects can be clearly
distinguished from unreal objects of the same object type (dreams, hallucinations, inventions, etc.). Only to the extent to which they can be
clearly distinguished, are they used in the formation of the system of
knowledge. 2. They can be intersubjectivized, i.e., in principle, they can

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 285

be placed in constructional systems which belong to other persons
(5 146 ff.) and can be confirmed or corrected through the reports of
other persons ( 3 144); they are included in the system of knowledge
only to the extent to which they can be intersubjectivized. 3. They are
independent from being cognized in the sense that they exist also at
times when they are not represented in my experiences or in the experiences of another. 4. They are independent of me, in the sense that a
wish to change them does not result in a change of their characteristics
unless a physical causal chain connects an appropriate motion of my
body with the object in question. 5. They are governed by their own
regularities which makes it occasionally possible to make predictions:
if I put my body into an appropriate position, then an experience of a
certain predictable kind takes place, whether I want it or not. However,
there is agreement, not only in the points just mentioned, but in all
points in which assertions are made at all by both theories. Construction
theory and realism do not contradict one another in any point.
Construction theory and subjective idealism agree with one another
in the claim that statements about objects of cognition can, in principle,
all be transformed into statements about structural properties of the given
(with retention of the logical value, cf. $ 50). Construction theory
agrees with solipsism in the notion that the given consists of my experiences. Construction theory agrees with transcendental idealism in the
conception that all objects of cognition are constructed (in idealistic
language: "are created in thought"); in fact, the constructed objects are
objects of conceptual knowledge only qua logical forms which are generated in a certain way. Ultimately, this holds also for the basic elements
of the constructional system. Even though these basic elements are initially introduced as unanalyzable units, eventually, in the progress of
construction, different properties are attributed to them, and they are
analyzed into (quasi) constituents ( $ 116). It is only through this procedure, that is, only as constructed objects, that they become objects of
cognition in the proper sense of the word, in particular, objects of psychology. Here again we have the situation that there is agreement between
idealism in its different varieties and construction theory in all points
where assertions are made by both theories. Construction theory and
idealism (objective, subjective, and solipsistic idealism) do not contradict one another in any point.
The same holds for phenomenalism. For, aside from asserting the
existence of "things-in-themselves", it shows no deviation from construe
tion theory, and construction theory neither a&ms nor denies the exist-

288

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

ence of things in themselves. Here again, we find agreement in all points
where both theories make assertions. Construction theory and phenomenalism do not contradict one another at any point.

178. The Divergence Among the Three Schools Occurs Only Within
the Field of Metaphysics
It is not particularly surprising that none of the doctrines-realism,
idealism (in its diierent varieties), and phenomenalism-show in themselves any contradiction to construction theory, yet contradict one
another. For, the three schools do, after all, agree with one another and
with construction theory in the following points: ultimately, all knowledge goes back to my experiences, which are related to one another,
connected, and synthesized; thus, there is a logical progress which leads,
first, to the various entities of my consciousness, then to the physical
objects, furthermore, with the aid of the latter, to the phenomena of
consciousness of other subjects, i.e., to the heteropsychologicai, and,
through the mediatio~lof the heteropsychological, to the cultural objects.
But this is the theory of knowledge in its entirety. Whatever else construction theory states about the necessary or the useful forms and
methods of construction belongs to the logical, but not to the epistemological, aspect of its task. The theory of knowledge does not reach
beyond what has just been indicated. How cognition can proceed from
one object to another, how, in what sequence, and in which form the
levels of a system of cognition can be formulated,-all this is contained
in the indicated material. The theory of knowledge cannot ask any
further questions.
But where do the contradictory components of realism, idealism, and
phenomenalism belong, if not to the theory of knowledge? The assertions
of these doctrines which stand in contradiction to one another are all
related to the second concept of reality ( 9 175), and this concept, as
we have already seen ( $ 176), belongs to metaphysics. From this it follows: the so-called epistemological schools of realism, idealism, and
phenomenalism agree within the field of epistemology. Construction
theory represents the neutral foundation which they have in commonThey diverge only in the field of metaphysics, that is to say (if they are
meant to be epistemological schools of thought), only because of a
transgression of their proper boundaries.
It is occasionally said that there is a (usually tacit) realism at the
bottom of the practical procedures of the empirical sciences, especially

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1

287

of physics. However, we must here clearly distinguish between a certain
kind of language usage and the assertion of a thesis. The realistic orientation of the physicist shows itself primarily in the use of realistic language; this is practical and justifiable (cf. 5 2 ) . On the other hand,
realism, as an explicit thesis, goes beyond this and is not permissible;
it must be corrected so as to become "objectivism": the regular connections (which in natural laws are formulated as implication statements)
are objective and are independent of the will of the individual; on the
other hand, the ascription of the property "real" to any substance (be
it matter, energy, electromagnetic field, or whatever) cannot be derived
from any experience and hence would be metaphysical.
REFERENCES. The above-indicated standpoint is closely related to
what Gatschenberger, [Symbola] 452, says about the reconciliation between idealists and spiritualists on the one hand, and materialists on
the other: "Materialism is a translation of spiritualism"; "All philosophers are correct, but they express themselves with varying degrees
of ineptness, and they cannot help this, since they use the available
language and consequently speak in a hundred sublanguages, instead of
inventing one pasigraphy." This neutral language is the goal of construction theory.
Carnap [Realismus] contains detailed expositions of the difference
between the empirical and the metaphysical concept of reality and more
exact reasons why the realism debate should be banished from science
and placed within metaphysics.

P

CHAPTER

AIMS AND LIMITS OF SCIENCE

179. The Aims of Science
We have repeatedly pointed out that the formation of the constructiond
system as a whole is the task of unified science, while construction
theory is merely engaged in carrying out the appropriate logical investigations. By placing the objects of science in one unified constructiond
system, the ditrerent "sciences" are at the same time recognized as
branches of the one science and are themselves brought into a system.
How should we determine the aim of unified science from the viewpoint of construction theory? The aim of science consists in finding and
ordering the true statements about the objects of cognition (not all true
statements, but a selection, made according to certain principles; we do
not undertake to discuss the teleological problem of these ~rinciplesat
this point).
In order to be able to approach this aim, that is, in order to be able
to make statements about objects at all, we must be able to construct
these objects (for, otherwise, their names have no meaning). Thus, the
formation of the constructional system is the first aim of science. It is
the first aim, not in a temporal, but in a logical, sense. The historical
development of science does not have to postpone the investigation of

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 289

an object until this object is placed within a constructional system. For
objects on higher levels, especially for biological and cultural objects,
science must not wait for this to take place, if it does not want to forego,
for a long time, the development of these essential fields with their important practical applications. Rather, in the actual process of science,
the objects are taken from the store of everyday knowledge and are
gradually purified and rationalized, while the intuitive components in
the determination of these objects are not eliminated, but are rationally
justified (cf. 8 100). Only when this has been successfully accomplished
can the object be constructed, and only when it has been carried out, in
addition, for all its constructional ancestors, can the constructional system be built up to the object in question. This is the procedure as it
historically takes place in actual practice. From a logical point of view,
however, statements which are made about an object become statements
in the strictest scientific sense only after the object has been constructed,
beginning from the basic objects. For, only the construction formula of
the object-as a rule of translation of statements about it into statements
about the basic objects, namely, about relations between elementary
experiences-gives a verifiable meaning to such statements, for verification means testing on the basis of experiences.
The first aim, then, is the construction of objects; it is followed by a
second aim, namely, the investigation of the nonconstructional properties
and relations of the objects. The first aim is reached through convention; lS8 the second, however, through experience. (In the view of construction theory, there are no other components in cognition than these
two, the conventional and the empirical; thus, there is no synthetic a
priori.) It has already been said that, in the actual process of science,
these two aims are almost always connected with one another. Moreover, most of the time, it is not even possible to make a selection of
those properties which are most useful for the constructional definition
of an object until a large number of properties of this object are known.
1x1 analogy, the construction of an object corresponds to the indication
of the geographical coordinates for a place on the surface of the earth.
The place is uniquely determined through these coordinates; any question about the nature of this place (perhaps about the climate, nature of
the soil, etc.) has now a definite meaning. To answer all these questions
is then a further aim which can never be completed and which is to be
approached through experience.
2___

Festsetzung

lM

290

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

REFERENCES. In the opinion of the Marburg Neo-Kantian school
(cf. Natorp [Grundlagen] 18 ff.), the object is the eternal X, and its

determination an aim that can never be accomplished. Against this, it
must be pointed out that a finite number of characteristics suffices for
the construction of the object, thus for its definite description within
the field of objects in general. If such a definite description is given,
then the object is no longer an X, but something that is uniquely determi: ~ d .whose
,
complete description, however, still remains a task that
canr-~rbe completed.

180. About the Limitations of Scientific Knowledge
Science, the system of conceptual knowledge, has no limits. But this
does not mean that there is nothing outside of science and that it is allinclusive. The total range of life has still many other dimensions outside
of science, but, within its dimension, science meets no barrier. Let us
consider an analogy: an infinite plane in space does not include the
entire space, but it is neverthe!ess unlimited, without border, and is thus
distinguished, for example, from a triangle within this plane. When we
say that scientific knowledge is not limited, we mean: there is no question whose answer is in principle unattainable by science. Concerning
the expression "in principle": if it is practically impossible to answer a
question about a certain event, because the event is too far removed in
either space or time, but if a question of a similar kind about a present
event which is within reach can in fact be answered, then we call the
question "practically unanswerable, but answerable in principle"; spatial
and temporal remoteness, we call a "mere technical obstacle", not an
"obstacle unsurrnountable in principle". In like fashion, a question is
said to be "answerable in principle" if it is not practically possible to
answer it today, but if a state of technological resources (in the widest
sense) can be envisaged which would make it possible to answer this
question.
It is occasionally said that the answer to some questions cannot be
conceptualized; that it cannot be formulated. But in such a case, the
question itself could not have been formulated. In order to recognize
this, let us investigate somewhat more closely what the answer to a
question consists in. In the strictly logical sense, to pose a question is to
give a statement together with the task of deciding whether this statement or its negation is true. A statement can only be given by producing
its symbol, namely, a sentence, which consists of words or other symbols. Now, it happens very frequently, especially in philosophy, that a

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICALPROBLEMS

1 291

sequence of words is given which has the outward construction of a
sentence and is therefore mistaken for one without being one. A string
of words can fail to be a sentence in two ways: first, if it contains a word
which has no meaning, or, second (and this is the more frequent case),
if the individual words do indeed have meaning (i.e., if they can occur
as parts of genuine, not merely apparent, sentences), but if this meaning
does not fit with the context of the sentence. In a word language, it is
very difficult to avoid such pseudo sentences, since, in order to recognize them, it is necessary to pay attention to the meaning of every individual word; on the other hand, in a logistic language, it is not necessary
to consider the meaning, but only the "type" of the sign (which corresponds to the sphere of the object, 8 29). Similarly, an ideal, logically
unobjectionable, word language would require of us no more than to
consider the grammatical word type and the idection forms. The difficulty in recognizing pseudo sentences in natural language is connected
with the problem of the "confusion of spheres" in the given word language which we have discussed earlier ( $ 30); it is not possible for us
here to concern ourselves with the particulars of this important logical
problem.
Now, if it is the case that a genuine question is posed, what are the
possibilities of giving an answer? In such a case, a statement is given;
it is expressed through conceptual symbols lS9 in formally permissible
combination. Now, in principle, every legitimate concept of science has
a definite place in the constructional system ("in principle", i.e., if not
today, then at a conceivable state of development of scientific knowledge); otherwise, the concept cannot be acknowledged to be legitimate.
Since we are here concerned only with answerability in principle, let us
disregard the stage of scientific development as it happens to be, and let
us assume that we have reached a stage where the concepts which occur
in the statement in question have already been placed within the constructional system. We now replace the sign for each of these concepts
as it occurs in the given sentence by the expression which defines it in
its constructional definition, and we carry out, step by step, further
substitutions of constructional definitions. We already know that, eventually, the sentence will have a form in which (outside of logical symbols) it contains only signs for basic relations. (This transformation has
been discussed in 5 119 and has been illustrated in an example.) Thus,
the sentence which was given when the question was posed has now
been so transformed that it expresses a definite (formal and extensional)
Begriffszeichen

204

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD

rational or an intuitive grasp of certain things. Against this objection,
we wish to propose the following compromise, in order to reach an
agreement about a reasonab!e delineation of the term "knowledge". Let
us proceed from those phenomena which are held to fall within the
field of "knowledge" by ourselves as well as by the objectors. Let us
think of the field of knowledge as comprising, in addition, all those
things which stand in the relation of dependency (either positive or
negative, i.e., either confirmation or contradiction) to the contents of
this common area. Furthermore, add to it all those things which stand
in a relation of dependency to the contents of the area as it has thus
been enlarged, etc. Let us be careful and choose as the common initial
field only the field of empirical knowledge (for example, "The oak is a
tree", "I have three apples"), and let us pose, for example, the question
whether the contents of mathematics should be called knowledge. In
this case, the suggested criterion would be applied in the following way.
The arithmetical statement "3 + 2 = 5" contradicts the following statements which belong to the field of empirical knowledge (i.e., whose
affirmation and negation are empirical cognitions): "I have three apples", "You have two apples", "Together we have four apples". Thus
the validity of these three statements is dependent upon the abovementioned statement of arithmetic. Consequently, this statement belongs
to the total field of knowledge (i.e., either its affirmation or its negation
is a true statement; our criterion does not decide which of these two
is the case, since we are not here concerned with the difference between
true and false, but only with the question of what belongs to the field
of knowledge). The criterion is fulfilled in a similar way, also, for all
other statements of arithmetic, of analysis, and of geometry, Thus, the
contents of mathematics belong to the field of knowledge; to the extent
to which its validity is ascertained, it should, according to the ~roposed
compromise, be called "knowledge". Thus, the entire area of rational
science, of formal as well as of empirical science, should be called
"knowledge".
Now, what about "nonrational knowledge", for example, the content
of a mystical, ineffable view of God? I t does not come into a relation
with any knowledge within the limits that we have so far staked out;
it can neither be confirmed nor disconfirmed by any of it; there is no
road from the continent of rational knowledge to the island of intuition,
while there is a road from the country of empirical knowledge to the
country of formal knowledge, which thus show that they belong to the
same continent. Thus it follows that, if our suggested compromise is
accepted, then nonrational intuition and religious faith (to the extent
to which they are not only a believing the truth of certain propositions,
but are ineffable) cannot be called knowledge.

CLARLFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1

S 5

It should be favorable to the peaceful relations between the various

spheres of life, if we do not designate two such heterogeneous spheres
with the same name. It is only through this that contradiction and strife
arise, which are not even possible as long as the complete heterogeneity
is clearly seen and emphasized.

182. Intuitive Metaphysics
The decision of the main questions about metaphysics, namely, whether
it is meaningful at all and has a right to exist and, if so, whether it is a
science, apparently depends entirely o n what is meant by "metaphysics".
Nowadays, there is no unanimity whatever o n this point. Some philosophers call metaphysics a such and such delineated area of (conceptual)
science. In view of the fact that this word, through its historical past,
contains for many a suggestion of the vague and speculative, it would
be more appropriate not to call such areas of philosophy which are to
be treated with strict scientific concepts "metaphysics". If what is in
question is basic knowledge (in the sense of logical, experiential, constructional order), then the name "basic science" could be used. If we
are concerned with the ultimate, most general knowledge, the name
"cosmology" o r a similar one could be employed.
Other philosophers use the name "metaphysics" for the result of a
nonrational, purely intuitive process; this seems to be the more appropriate usage.

REFERENCES. In referring metaphysics to the area of the nonrational, we are in agreement with many metaphysicians. Cf., for example, Bergson ([Metaphysik] 5): "That science which wants to get
by without symbols." This means metaphysics does not wish to grasp
its object by proceeding via concepts, which are symbols, but immediately through intuition. Schlick [Metaphysik] gives an especially clear
account of the difference between metaphysics and knowledge.

If the name "metaphysics" is used in this sense, then it follows immediately that metaphysics is not a science (in our sense). If someone
wishes to contradict ihk, h e should be quite clear whether he opposes
our delineation of the term "metaphysics" or (as Bergson) our delineation of the term "science". We are not as much concerned with the
former as we are with the latter; if it were found desirable to call "metaphysics" what we have called "basic science" o r "cosmology", we should
be perfectly agreeable and consequently would have to call metaphysics,
too, a science; on the other hand, a deviation from our restriction of the

296

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OP THE WORLD

meaning of the expressions "knowledge" and "science" to the field of
the rational seems to us altogether inappropriate for the reasons given
in 0 181.
That intuitive metaphysics, too, uses words for its exposition should
not lead to the opinion that it proceeds within the field of concepts and
thus belongs to (rational) science. For, even though we may call conceptual only that which can be expressed through words or other signs,
it does not follow that everything that employs words is conceptual. There
are spheres of Iife other than conceptual knowledge in which words are
used, for example, in the imposition of will from person to person, in
art, in the area of myth, which stands between science and art (and to
which intuitive metaphysics perhaps belongs), and in other areas. Words
can be considered signs of concepts only if they are either defmed or at
least if they can be defined; more precisely, if they are placed within an
experiential constructional system or at least if they can be so placed
(cf. the quotation from Petzold in 3 180).

183. Rationalism?
The indicated position, namely, that (rational) science not only can
deal with any objects, but that it also never comes to a limit, never meets
with a question that cannot in principle be answered, is occasionally
called "rationalism"; however, this expression is not justified. If we take
the word in the sense of the old epistemological and theoretical opposition between rationalism and empiricism, then this expression should
obviously not be used to indicate our position. Since, according to construction theory, each statement of science is at bottom a statement
about relations that hold between elementary experiences, it follows that
each substantive (i.e., not purely formal) insight goes back to experience. Thus, the designation "empiricism" is more justified. (That it is
not a raw empiricism needs hardly to be emphasized in view of the
importance which construction theory attaches to the form components
of cognition.)
However, the word "rationalism" is nowadays, for the most part, and
perhaps also in this case, used in its modem sense, namely, in opposition
to irrationalism. But even in this sense we would not wish to have it
applied to construction theory. After all, the word is meant, not so much
for those positions which, like ours, wish to give reason (i.e., to concep
tualizing understanding) a leading role within the field of knowledge, but,
rather, it is applied to those persuasions which wish to bestow such a

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 297

position upon it with respect to life as a whole. But such a tendency is
found neither in construction theory in general nor in the notion that
conceptual knowledge is unlimited. The proud thesis that no question
is in principle unsolvable for science agrees very well with the humble
insight that, even after all questions have been answered, the problem
which life poses for us has not yet been solved. The task of cognition
is a definite, well-circumscribed, important task in life, and it can certainly
be demanded that mankind should shape that aspect of life which can
be shaped with the aid of knowledge by a determined application of this
knowledge, that is, by using the methods of science. Even if modem
movements frequently underestimate the importance of science for life,
we do not wish to fall into the opposite error. Rather, we wish to admit
clearly to ourselves, who are engaged in scientific work, that the mastery
of life requires an effort of all our various powers; we should be wary
of the shortsighted belief that the demands of life can all be met with
the power of conceptual thinking alone.
To put it otherwise: for us there is no "Zgnorabimus"; nevertheless,
there are perhaps unsolvable riddles of life. This is not a contradiction.
Ignorabimus would mean: there are questions to which it is in principle
impossible to find answers. However, the ''riddles of life" are not questions, but are practical sitriations. The "riddle of death" consists in the
shock through the death of a fellow man or in the fear of one's own
death. It has nothing to do with questions which can be asked about
death, even if some men, deceiving themselves, occasionally believe that
they have formulated this riddle by pronouncing such questions. In principle, these questions can be answered by biology (though presently only
to a very small extent), but these answers are of no help to a grieved
person, which shows that it is a self-deception to regard them as formulations of the riddle of death. Rather, the riddle consists in the task of
"getting over" this life situation, of overcoming the shock, and perhaps
even making it fruitful for one's later lie. Our thesis that all questions
can be answered has indeed a certain connection with this task of overcoming, but this connection is so remote that the thesis does not make
any assertion as to whether or not it is in principle always possible to
surmount such distress. We do not have to decide this here.
REFERENCES. Wittgenstein has clearly formulated the proud thesis
of the omnipotence of rational science as well as the humble insight
relative to its importance for practical life: "For an answer which
cannot be expressed, the question too cannot be expressed. The riddle
does not exist. If a question can be put at all, then it can also be an-

298

1 THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF

THE WORLD

swered. . . . We feel that even if all possible scientific questions are
answered, the problems of life still have not been touched at all. Of
course there is then no question left, and just this is the answer."
[Abhandlg.] 262. Unfortunately, this treatise has remained almost unknown. In part, it is difficult to understand and has not been sufficiently
clarified, but it is very valuable, both in its logical derivations and in
the ethical attitude which it shows. Wittgenstein summarizes the import
of his treatise in the following words: "What can be said at all, can be
said clearly, and whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent."
(p. 185).

Summary

We wish to discuss some exanlples in order to show that the ordering of concepts which construction theory achieves allows a more precise formulation
of the problems (157).
A. Some Problems of Essence (158-165)
The investigation of the traditional distinction between individual and general concepts shows that these are not two essentially different kinds of
entity. The so-called individual concepts, too, must be constructed as classes or
relations. The only difference is that, to an individual concept, there corresponds a connected area in the space-time order, while for the general concepts we have such a correspondence only with respect to another (qualitative)
order. From a logical point of view, the former are not simpler or more uniform than the latter (158).
Identity: two signs are "synonymous", mean "the same", if they are everywhere interchangeable. In common usage we frequently call objects "the
same" even if they are not strictly identical. This improper identification is
based upon a strict identity, not indeed of the objects in question, but of
objects on a higher level (e.g., classes to which these objects belong); among
the objects themselves there holds another relation, frequently that of genidentity or of equivalence relative to some order or to the intersubjective
correlation ( 159).
What ir the esyence o f the physical, the psychological, the cultlcral? The
objects of these types are quasi objects, linguistic aids for the representation
of certain relations among experiences (160). This is their constructional
essence. The indication of the scientific or constructional essence of an object
can only consist in the indication of criteria for the truth of those sentences
in which the name of the object occurs. This can be done, for example, by

CLARIFICATION OF SOME PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS

1 299

giving constructional chain definitions. Questions that go beyond this cannot
be answered by using constructable concepts; they are concerned with the
metaphysical essence of objects and lie outside of the framework of science
(161).
The problem o f mind-body dualism: are there two essentially different
object types? Answer: the physical and the psychological are two different
forms of order (analogy: stellar constellations) of the basic elements. There
is only one kind of basic element, yet there are not only two, but very many,
different ways of ordering them. This is no peculiarity of the empirical world,
but holds analytically of any ordered domain (162).
The self is the class (not the collection) of the experiences (or autopsychological states). The self does not belong to the expression of the basic experience, but is constructed only on a very high level (163).
The intention relation between a psychological event and that which is
meant by it is not a unique, irreducible relation; rather, it is a special case of
the relation between an experience and a real-typical experiential structure
which includes that experience ( 164).
In science, cazrsality means nothing but functional dependency. Strictly
speaking, it does not exist in the perceptual world, but only in the world of
physics. The dependency holds between a state and a certain limiting- value in
the assignments of state magnitudes; hence, it does not hold between events.
Thus, the concepts of "cause" and "effect", which have already lost their
anthropomorphic sense of "bringing about" in the perceptual world, have no
meaning at all in the world of physics (165).
B . The ~sychophysicalProblem (166-169)
The psychophysical problem of traditional philosophy asks for an explanation of psychophysical parallelism (166). This parallelism cannot, originally,
relate to the heteropsychological (167), but can be empirically observed only
as a parallelism between the sequence of autopsychological events and observed processes of my own brain. However, during this observation, the brain
processes occur as the contents of my own experiences. Hence we are here
not concerned with a parallelism of essentially different entities, but between
sequences of constituents of experiences; such parallelisms occur frequently
in other contexts too (168). In science we can only ascertain that there is such
a parallelism. The interpretation of this fact belongs to metaphysics. In science
we cannot even pose a question that expresses this metaphysical problem
(169).
C . The Constructional or Empirical Problem of Reality (170-174)
We can use empirical criteria in order to differentiate between a "real"
thing and a "nonreal" one, e.g., a merely imagined, invented or erroneously
Supposed entity: the "empirical" or "constructional" concept of reality. This
concept of reality retains its validity even in a system with autopsychological
basis (170). There is a distinction between real and nonreal not only in the
-

-

300

1

THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE W O R L D

physical, but also in the psychological and cultural domains. The indicators
of reality are the same in the various object domains, namely, participation in
a comprehensive, law-governed system, and a position in the time order (171).
Objects which are either real or nonreal we call real-typical; for all other
objects, there is no sense to the question whether they are real or not (172).
The boundary line of the real-typical as drawn by ordinary linguistic usage
has an inconsistent, arbitrary, and wavering course (173, 174).

Is
%

D. The Metaphysical Problem of Reality (175-178)
There is still another concept of reality, usually formulated as "independence from the cognizing consciousness". It is this concept which is meant by
both realism and idealism when they affirm or deny the reality of the outside
world (175). We call this concept of reality "metaphysical" since it cannot be
defined through scientific, i.e., constructable concepts; the same holds for the
concept of the "thing-in-itself" (176). Any question which is answered by
construction theory as well as realism, idealism, and phenomenalism is answered uniformly (177). The divergences between the three schools occur only
where they leave the domain of the constructable, that is, the domain of science; however, then we are no longer concerned with epistemology, but with
metaphysics. The practical procedure of the empirical sciences is "realistic"
only in language, not in the metaphysical sense. For the empirical sciences,
realism in the proper sense is meaningless; it is to be replaced by an "objectivism" of lawlike regularities (178).

E. Aims and Limits of Science (179-183)
The aim of science consists in finding and ordering the true propositions.
This is done, first, through the formulation of the constructional systemthat is, the introduction of concepts-and, second, through the ascertainment
of the empirical connections between these concepts (179). In science, there
is no question that is unanswerable in principle. For, each question consists in
putting forth a statement whose truth or falsity is to be ascertained. However,
each statement can, in principle, be translated into a statement about the basic
relation; and each such statement can in principle be verified through confrontation with the given (1 80). Faith and intuition in the nonrational (e.g.,
religious) sense have nothing to do with the distinction between true and
false; they do not belong to the domain of theory and cognition (181). If, like
many metaphysicians themselves, we mean by metaphysics not the doctrine
of the logically most basic, or the highest, scientific insights (i.e., "basic
science" or "cosmology"), but a domain of pure intuition, then metaphysics
has nothing to do with science and the rational domain; between the two there
can be neither confirmation nor contradiction (182). The indicated position
is not that of rationalism, since it demands rationality only for science. For
practical life the existence and importance of the remaining, nonrational
spheres is acknowledged (183).

PseudoprobZems in Philosophy
THE HETEROPSYCHOLOGICAL AND THE
REALISM CONTROVERSY

THE MEANZNG OF
EPISTEMOLOGICAL ANALYSlS

1. The Problem
The aim of epistemology is the formulation of a method for the justification of cognitions.' Epistemology must specify how an ostensible piece
of knowledge can be justified, that is, how it can be shown that it is
authentic knowledge. Such a justification, however, is not absolute but
relative; the content of a certain cognition is justified by relating it to
the contents of other cognitions which are presumed to be valid. Hence,
one content is "reduced" to another, or "epistemologically analyzed".
Logic, too, teaches the derivation of the validity of certain propositions
(expressed by sentences) from the presupposed validity of others ("inference"). The diierence is that logical derivation takes place through
reorganization of concepts; in the derived proposition no new concept
may occur. On the other hand, it is characteristic of an epistemological
derivation that the cognition to be analyzed, that is, the sentence that is to
be justified and derived, contains a concept which does not occur in the
premise^.^
In order to analyze the contents of cognitions, epistemology must in-

= Erkemtnisse
Setzungen
a Voraussetzungen

308

1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

vestigate the objects (concepts) of (empirical) science in its various
subdivisions (natural and cultural sciences). It must ascertain to which
other objects the cognition of any given object may be "reduced".
Hence, "an analysis" of objects is undertaken where the "higher" objects are reduced to "lower" ones. Those objects which can no longer
be reduced are called "(epistemologically) fundamental" objects.
But what is actually meant by this epistemological analysis? What
does it mean to say that object a "is (epistemologically) reducible" to
object b? Only when this question is answered is the task of epistemology
clearly formulated and only then is it clear what is to be meant by
"fundamental" objects.
It has frequently been emphasized that the epistemological quest for
the justification or reduction of a cognition to others must be differentiated from the psychological question concerning the origin of a cognition. But this is only a negative determination. For those who are not
satisfied with the expressions "given", "reducible7', "fundamental", or
those who want to eschew using these concepts in their philosophy, the
aim of epistemology has not been formulated at all. In the following
investigations we propose to give a precise formulation of this aim. It
will turn out that we can formulate the purpose of epistemological analysis without having to use these expressions of traditional philosophy. We
only have to go back to the concept of implication (as it is expressed in
if-then-sentences).
This is a fundamental concept of logic which
cannot be criticized or even avoided by anyone: it is indispensable in
any philosophy, nay, in any branch of science.
In the course of the development of a science it frequently happens
that answers, indeed correct answers, to a question are found even before
that question has been given a precise conceptual formulation. What
happens in these cases is that a certain trend of concept formation is
intuitively projected and maintained, but there is no recognition what
the thus formed concepts actually mean. When finally a conceptual
formulation for the intuitively posed question is found, the previously
found answers are released from their state of suspension and are placed
on the solid foundation of the scientific system.

EXAMPLE.The inventors of the infinitesimal calculus (Leibniz
Newton) were able to answer questions concerning the derivative (the
merentid quotient) of common mathematical functions; for example*
the derivative of the function x3 is the function 3x2. However, they could
not say to what question this expression is an answer, that is, what actually is to be understood by the "derivative" of a function. They could

THE AIM O F EPISTEMOLOGY

1 307

indicate various applications (for example the direction of the tangent)
but they could not give a precise definition of the concept "derivative".
To be sure, they believed that they knew what they meant by this expression, but they only had an intuitive notion, not a conceptual definition.
They thought that they had a definition which allowed them to have a
conceptual understanding of "derivative". However, their formulations
for this definition used such expressions as "infinitesimally small magnitude" and quotions of such, which, upon more precise analysis, turn out
to be pseudo concepts (empty words). It took more than a century before
an unobjectionable definition of the general concept of a limit and thus of
a derivative was given. Only then all those mathematical results which
had long since been used in mathematics were given their actual meaning.
I n epistemological analysis the situation is very similar. Science has
long been in the possession of a great number of results of epistemological analysis. She had the answers without being in the possession of the
questions, that is to say, without being able to indicate the precise sense
of these answers. Such already known answers are, for example, that
the cognition of processes of consciousness of another person is "based
upon" the perception of his motions and linguistic utterances; that
the cognition of a physical object "goes back" to perceptions; that a
given experience "consists of" the visual perception of a bell, the auditory perception of a sound and an emotional component; the perception
of a given sound "consists of" individual perceptions of such and such
tones. One may be inclined to call the last two examples pieces of
"psychological" analysis rather than epistemological analysis. It is indeed
the case that analyses of this k i d are a fundamental part of psychological
procedure. For it is only through this procedure of concept formation that
psychology determines its objects. However, we shall see later that this
procedure is nothing but the epistemological analysis with whose meaning we are here concerned.
In science (and to some extent even in daily life) we are in the possession of the answers which are indicated in the above examples; but
the actual meaning of these answers we do not know. It would be an
error to interpret the "consists of . ." as "is synthesized of . . . in
the course of experience". Psychology, in this case especially Gestalt
psychology, tells us that the total perception is experienced before the
individual sensation out of which it is "synthesized". We become conscious of the latter only through a subsequent process of abstraction.
Similar considerations hold for the other examples.

.

'Gefiihlskomplex

308

1

PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

Now it becomes apparent how important it is to give a clear formulation of the meaning of epistemological analysis. Initially, such a fomulation will not produce an increase in knowledge, but only increased
purity of knowledge: the results of already performed epistemological
analyses can be clearly formulated. Moreover it will be seen that epistemological analysis, after a more precise definition of the concepts has
been given, will become applicable in cases where the former, predominantly intuitive procedure did not succeed, though the failure of the
intuitive procedure was not inevitable in these cases; perhaps there was
only a lack of courage to see it through. If we use epistemological analysis in a conscious and clearly conceptualized way, we shall be able to
reduce objects (contents of cognitions, concepts) to one another to a
sufficiently large extent so that the possibility of a general reductional
system ("constructional system") can be demonstrated: it is in principle possible to place all concepts of all the areas of science into this
system, that is to say, they are reducible to one another and ultimately
to a few basic concepts. (The proof for this thesis of a constructional
system can only be indicated in this paper, ยง 6 ) .

2. Logical Analysis

Epistemological analysis is an analysis of the contents of experiences,
more precisely the analysis of the theoretical content of experiences. We
are concerned only with the theoretical content of the experience, that
is, with the possible knowledge that is contained in the experience. (The
analysis is not an actual division: the experience remains what it is:
the analysis takes place in the course of a subsequent consideration of
the already past and hence no longer alterable experience; hence it is
only an "abstractive", conceptual analysis.)
In the following we shall try to describe briefly a method which will
lead to results that are generally acknowledged to belong to epistemology
(like the examples mentioned earlier). This method of analysis is that
which is meant (or which ought to be meant), if one speaks of "epistemological analysis".
The first step in our procedure consists in the "logical division" of the
theoretical content of an experience into two parts: one of these we
call the "(epistemologically) suficient constituent", the remainder we
call (relative to that first constituent) the "(epistemologically) dispens-

able constituent". Let us consider an example. I touch a certain key
which I have often seen; I recognize it by touching it, even though I do
not see it at the moment. In touching the key I experience not only the
representation of the tactile shape of the key, but simultaneously (and
not just subsequently by way of inference) the representation of its
visual shape, even if I keep my eyes closed. I can make an "epistemic
evaluation" of any experience I have had by stating to what extent this
experience has added to my (theoretical) knowledge. This addition
consists not only of the theoretical content of the experience itself, but
also of whatever I can infer from this content with the aid of my earlier
knowledge. The epistemic evaluation of the indicated experience with
the key has the following result: "this thing has such and such a shape;
this thing is the key to my house; this thing has the color of steel." The
experience contains united in it the representation of a tactile shape and
that of a visual shape, but when the experience is evaluated, I can
actually discount the second constituent, namely the visual shape, since
the first constituent already suffices, together with my previous knowledge, to let me conclude that it is a key, indeed the familiar key to my
house. Hence I am in a position to infer its visual shape, its color, etc.
Hence in the epistemic evaluation I do not have to draw this information
out of the experience itself. For this reason we want to call the tactile
shape a "sufficient constituent" of the experience, the visual shape (relative to the tactile shape) a "dispensable constituent". However, this
constituent is dispensable only if we are concerned with adding to our
knowledge, and it is only in this sense that the other constituent is
smcient. On the other hand, so far as the experience itself is concerned,
the former constituent is not dispensable and the latter is not sufficient;
for if the dispensable constituent were removed from the experience it
would be an entirely different experience.
A simple consideration shows that this logical analysis is frequently
ambiguous, that is, that one and the same experience can be analyzed
in difEerent ways. In our example one could very well forego the epistemic
evaluation of the tactile shape. The epistemic evaluation of the visual
shape would already suffice to draw out of the experience all that can
be known. In this case it is particularly clear that the "dispensable" constituent can be given this name only in an epistemological sense: since
the key has only been touched and not seen, we cannot, in this experience, dispense with the tactile shape without at the same time removing
the experience itself; on the other hand we could dispense with the
Vorstellung

310 1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

I

epistemic evaluation of this constituent without thereby diminishing the
extent of our knowledge.
b.

1 311

example the tactile shape of the key), and we then try to add to it through
rational construction the second constituent (in the example the visual
shape). If we succeed, then the latter is shown to be a dispensable constituent. It must be noted, however, that this fictional mode of expression
is by no means necessary: the more precise and proper mode of expression is that which has been given earlier; using only constituent a (and
my prior knowledge) rational reconstruction will arrive at the same
knowledge that could have been gained by evaluating constituent b.

THE CRITERION: RATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION

We must now define a method which allows us to decide in any given
case whether a certain constituent of an experience is sufficient, that is,
whether the rest of the experience is dispensable relative to it. For the
facts are not always as simple as in the indicated example where we could
easily see that a certain constituent is dispensable.
To say that a constituent b of an experience (e.g., the visual appearance of the key) is dispensable relative to constituent a (the tactile
shape) is to say that b does not give me any information that is not
already contained in a together with my prior knowledge. It is not necessary in such a case that I should be expressly conscious of the theoretical
content of b; it is merely required that a, together with my prior knowledge, should logically contain b. If the theoretical content of b is logically contained in a and my prior knowledge, then it must be possible
to derive it from them through inference. In our example, this derivation would look something like this: from the tactile shape (constituent
a ) together with my prior tactile perceptions I can infer that the touched
object is the key to my house. And I know from prior visual perceptions
that this key has a certain visual appearance: it has such and such a
shape and color, both relatively permanent. From this I infer that the
touched object has this visual appearance (constituent b). This inference of constituent b from constituent a together with my prior knowledge we call "rational reconstruction" of b.
It is clear that our conception of "rational reconstruction" does not
claim t h d in the actual experience the constituent b is inferred from a.
There can be no question that both constituents are simply experienced
as an intuitive unit: there is not a trace of inference in such an experience. We also prefer not to use the locution "unconscious inference".
But even if in the experience itself generally no rational construction is
present we can still afterwards carry out a rational reconstruction-an
inferential procedure whose purpose it is to investigate whether or not
there is a certain logical dependency between certain constituents of
the experience.
In order to gain a clearer understanding of the meaning of the rational
reconstruction of a dispensable constituent of an experience, let us consider the following fiction: we imagine that the experience has, to begin
with, only one constituent, namely the sufficient constituent (in the

THE AIM OF EPISTEMOLOGY

I

C. THE OVERDETERMINATENESS OF THE EXPERIENTIAL CONTENT

The logical character of the theoretical content of our experiences, due
to which certain constituents are dispensable relative to others, is to be
called their overdeterminateness. In mathematics we frequently call a
problem overdetermined if more data are given than are necessary to
solve the problem, so that at least one of the data is dispensable relative
to the rest and can be derived constructively (either by calculation or
drawing) from them. In this sense our experience is (epistemologically)
overdetermined. We experience more than is necessary in order to gain
the knowledge that can be obtained. This is to say, we can leave certain
constituents of experiences unevaluated (fictional expression: these constituents could disappear from our experience) and our knowledge
would not be diminished.
Overdeterminateness of the theoretical content of our experience leads
to a problem which must here be briefly indicated. It is well known that
an overdetermined problem does not permit a solution for an arbitrarily
chosen set of data. It is solvable only if the data are not arbitrary but
if a certain special condition is fulfilled which could be called the consistency of the data. Is it the case that the experiential contents fulfill
such special conditions or is the aim of cognition unattainable? Neither
of these is the case. There is a certain diierence between the aim of
cognition and a mathematical problem. The experiential contents do
not fulfill a special condition of consistency (the fact that they fulfill the
general condition of being orderable in some way or another has nothing
to do with this point) ; if we think of a certain experience as being of a
nature somewhat different than it in fact is, while the rest of them remains
unchanged, then with respect to the changed course of experience the
aim of cognition is by no means unobtainable; under certain circumstances it may become somewhat more difficult, since we would have to
give a different form to certain laws of nature. By contrast, an overdetermined but solvable mathematical problem does not remain solvable if one

312

1

THE AIM OF EPISTEMOLDGY

PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

of the given data is allowed to change arbitrarily. This difference between
the aim of cognition and the mathematical problem rests upon the essential difference that in the case of the mathematical problem the laws
according to which the solution is to be derived from the data is already
determined before the problem is posed; on the other hand, in the case
of the aim of cognition these laws (namely the regularities which hold
among real objects, that is to say, the natural laws in the widest sense)
folIow from the data, the material of cognition, itself. This is the reason
why, if the data are varied at a given point, the derived laws themsclves
suffer corresponding changes in such a way that there is no inconsistency
between the altered material and the changed laws.
EXAMPLE. Let a sequence of experiences have the following content:
a brown rod, apparently made of copper, is balanced on a pivot; then a
flame is held to one end of the rod, and that end tilts downward; this
result is to be interpreted as an elongation of the rod. Now think of this
content as being changed in this way: the rod tilts upward on the side
where the flame is, while all the other constituents and the rest of my
experiences remain the same. I am then forced to discredit something that
I would otherwise have believed. However I have considerable freedom
of choice. For example, I can assume that the st& is not made of copper;
or that copper does not expand when it is heated; or that the yellow
object is not a flame (combustion process); or that the flame does not
heat; or that an upward tilt of the rod does not indicate shortening; or
that I have hallucinated: in this latter case I have again several choices
for declaring as invalid the criteria which made me believe in the first
place that I had a conscious perception. I would then make that assumption which in the total system of natural laws would produce the smallest
amount of change.

Since all natural laws have been derived inductively, that is to say
through a comparison of experiential contents, a variation of the mater i d at a given point can very well change the content of the laws and
thus the content of reality as it is known, but cannot prevent the recognition of laws in general and hence of reality. Strictly speaking, contents
of experiences cannot contradict one another; they are independent of
one another in the strict logical sense. Strictly speaking there is no overdeterminateness of the total content of the experiences: they are overdetermined only in relation to the empirical-inductive regularities.

1 313

3. Epistemological Analysis
a. NUCLEUS

AND SECONDARY PART

We make a distinction between the logical analysis of the cognitive content of an experience (into a sufficient constituent and a constituent that
is dispensable relative to it) and the epistemological analysis into "nucleus" and "secondary part". The latter is a special case of the former:
if the constituents a and b are to be called "(epistemological) nucleus"
and "secondary part", then, to begin with, b must be a dispensable constituent relative to a. In addition-and this is why we here speak of
"epistemological" division-b must epistemically "reduce" to a, that is,
the cognition of b must "rest upon" the cognition of a, a must be "epistemically primary". The given expressions should give a rough idea of
what is meant here; a more precise formulation of the concept of epistemological analysis can be given only through the indication of certain
criteria. Before we consider these, let us go back to the earlier example.
Let us designate as S the experience in which the key was merely
felt but not seen, but in which the visual shape of the key is nevertheless
contained as a representation; its constituents are called a (tactile shape)
and b (visual appearance). If the experience is of such a nature that the
key is felt and at the same time seen, then we call it Sf and the new
constituents a' and b'. From the preceding considerations it can easily
be seen (and can be demonstrated through the method of rational reconstruction) that b is a dispensable constituent relative to a and conversely
a relative to b: likewise b' is dispensable relative to a' and a' relative to
b'. Hence there is a logical dependency in both cases which holds in
both directions. However, things are different with the relation of epistemic dependency: it holds only in the first case, and there only in one
direction. In experience S our knowledge of b (visual appearance) rests
upon that of a (tactile shape) but not vice versa, while in experience S'
both constituents are epistemically independent: knowledge of neither
of them rests upon knowledge of the other.
b.

FIRST CRITERION: JUSTIFICATION

In order to find the criterion for epistemological analysis, all we have
to do is to make it clear why, in the simple example given above, we have
decided that the epistemological relation between nucleus and the
secondary part in experience S obtains between a and b but not between
b and a, and why this relation does not hold at all between the constitu-

314

1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

ents of experience S'. We asked ourselves "on what does our knowledge
of b rest?", more precisely, "if I have had experience S, what reasons can
I give for my (alleged) knowledge of the content of b; how can I justify
it against doubts?". It is not necessary that these doubts should actually
have been expressed by myself or others; it is sufficient to raise a
"methodological doubt", the point of which is not a refusal to believe,
but a quest for justification. The criterion for the epistemological relation between secondary part and nucleus lies in the possibility of justifying a cognition against which (real or methodological doubt) has been
raised through another cognition whose validity has been admitted or
hypothetically assumed.
In order to perform epistemological analysis in a concrete case, that
is, in order to answer the question whether two given constituents of an
experience, a and 6 , are nucleus and secondary part of that experience,
we will, as a rule, turn to the special science which is concerned with
the field in question. We will investigate whether, according to the methods customary in that field, an assertion which is based upon the content
of b is considered demonstrated if for its justification we can refer to a
cognition based on the content of a. In this way the epistemological decision is made dependent upon the procedure of a special science, that is
to say, this procedure is presupposed as epistemologically unobjectionable; on the other hand, epistemology will gradually construct a system
from which the procedures of the individual sciences will be critically
surveyed. This is not a vicious circle, for this mode of approach corresponds to an essential feature of science, whose system does not arise
in clearly determined steps from the given material; rather, initially the
methodological principles are practically employed in the synthesis of
the material of cognition, and are only later on clearly recognized and
made explicit; this makes it possible to standardize the principles and
to approach the material again with these standardized principles. In this
way the interplay between the particular scientific and the epistemological investigation will lead to an integrated system of unified science.
By going back to the method of a special science in order to decide
a given epistemological question, we do not introduce this special science
as a presupposition for a valid system of knowledge (as in Kant's transcendental method). For we are not yet concerned with the question
whether the (alleged) cognitions of the particular special science are to
be considered correct or not, but with the question whether or not the
Bearbeitung
vereinheitlichen

THE AIM OF EPISTEMOLOGY

1

315

epistemological dependency relation (nucleus-secondary part) holds
between given objects of the field.
C. SECOND CRITERION: THE

POSSIBILITY O F ERROR

That two constituents of an experience, a and b, stand in the relation of
nucleus and secondary part becomes especially obvious when constituent b rests upon "an error"; that is to say, when it turns out later that the
theorctical content of b is erroneous, that the state of affairs which is
reflected in b does not actually hold. I: is not necessary that we should
actually be in error about the experience we wish to test: for epistemological analysis it will suffice if we know, on the basis of other experiences, that with experiences of this sort such an error can arise.
Let us again turn to our examples, namely the touching of the key
with accompanying visual representation (S) and the simultaneous seeing and touching of the key ( S t ) . Now consider the following case: I
touch the key and think that I recognize it as my own; I believe it to be
steel colored but it turns out afterward that the object that I have
touched has the color of brass. Even if this case does not actually take
place, I know on the basis of other experiences that it can take place in
a case like S. This shows that the constituent b in S (visual shape) is a
secondary part to a (tactile shape). On the other hand in an experience
like S' such an error cannot occur: hence between b' and a' the relation
secondary part-nucleus does not hold. For our problem it is of no concern
what the experiential difference between S and S' actually consists in. One
can assume either that in the phenomenal sphere itself there is a difference of a qualitative, experiential sort between an actual perception and
a mere representation, or one may assume that it is possible, on the
basis of other experiential contents (namely so far as they allow us to
recognize the physical relation between the object and the sense organ
in question), to decide whether or not an actual perception has taken
place. For epistemological analysis it suffices that one can decide the
question whether a given constituent is to be considered an actual perception or a mere representation; (i.e., the question whether an experience of type S or an experience of type S' is present).

THE AIM OF EPISTEMOLOGY

APPLICATION: KNOWLEDGE OF THE
HETEROPSYCHOLOGZCAL

4. Logical Analysis of the Cognition of Heteropsychological
Occurrences
The indicated relations, namely the logical relation between sufficient
and dispensable constituent, and the epistemological relation between
nucleus and secondary part are-especially in the case of our examplevery simple and might appear trivial. However, these concepts can also
be applied to cases with which conflicting philosophical theses and antitheses are connected, for example, to the problem of the cognition of the
heteropsychological. It is a more and more widely accepted fact that the
autopsychological and the heteropsychological have an entirely different
epistemological character; at the present time this fact can be denied
only if one holds to certain metaphysical persuasions. The epistemological difference between the heteropsychological and the autopsychological
will become particularly clear through the investigation of the epistemological relationship between the heteropsychological and the physical.
The subsequent considerations are to demonstrate the following thesis:
the epistemological nucleus of every concrete cognition of heteropsychological occurrences consists of a perception of physical phenomena, or,
to put it otherwise, the heteropsychological occurs only as an (epistemologically) secondary part of the physical. For the purpose of this demonstration we will first undertake a logical, and then an epistemological,
analysis.

1 317

Any knowledge I might have of a concrete heteropsychological fact,
that is, of certain conscious (or unconscious) occurrences of another
subject A, I can have acquired in different ways. Heteropsychological
occurrences are discovered if A reports processes of his consciousness
to me (in this case let my experience be called E l ) ; secondly, such facts
are discovered without any report if I observe expressive motions (facial
expressions, gestures), or acts of A (Ez); occasionally I can surmise the
conscious processes of A if I know his character and know, in addition,
that he is now subject to certain external conditions (E3). There is no
other way to gain knowledge of the heteropsychological. (We will not
concern ourselves here with telepathy since at least in science it is not
used as a means of gathering information about the heteropsychological.)
In each of the cases, El, E2, E,, the cognition of the heteropsychological is connected with the perception of physical facts. To begin with let
us carry out a logical analysis and let us show that in all cases the perceptions of the physical occurrences (constituents al, a*, as, respectively)
are sufficient constituents, i.e., that the representations of heteropsychological occurrences (constituents bl, b2, b3, respectively) occur only as
dispensable constituents (in the sense of our earlier definitions).
On the basis of the preceeding considerations we ascertain that the
relation "sufficient-dispensable constituent" holds between a and b by
showing that a rational reconstruction of b on the basis of a and prior
knowledge is possible. In case El the rational reconstruction of bl is
possible in the following way: after having understood the report of A,
we isolate from this perception, for the purpose of episternic evaluation,
only the physical sign (al),i.e., for example, the hearing of the spoken
words (as sounds) or the seeing of the written words (as marks), but
not the understanding of these signs (b,), which is also contained in the
experience; from this material al we then infer the theoretical content of
bl, utilizing our prior knowledge. This reconstruction presupposes, of
course, that the words which occur are already known or that their meaning can be surmised. If this presupposition is not fulfilled, then no experience of kind El is present; the constituent bl does not occur; if I get a
letter in Chinese, I see nothing but black lines without finding out anything about heteropsychological occurrences. However, if the presupposition is fulfilled (i.e., if I know the word meanings), then I can infer
from the perceived words (either the heard noises, or the seen figures)
the meaning of the statement: and this is the content of bl, namely the
heteropsychologica1occurrence which is cognized in El.
In E2 (perceptions of acts and expressive motions of A) the case is

318

1

THE AIM O F EPISTEMOLOGY

PSEUDOPROBLEhfS I N PHILOSOPHY

In the third case, E3 (surmise from the known character and the perceived or otherwise known present external circumstances of A) has no
fundamental importance. In this case the experiencing person himself
will generally be aware of the fact that this is not an original cognition
but an inference or an inference-like intuitive procedure, since knowl-

319

edge of the character of A is presupposed. But even in this case the
psychological occurrence in A ( b 3 )can be reconstructed from the known
physical circumstances (a3) if the knowledge of the character of A is
taken into account. Occasionally, a psychological occurrence in A (b3)
is not immediately recognized at all in such an experience, but is literally
inferred.
Let it be emphasized again that the indicated method of rational reconstruction does not imply that in the actual experience b (the heteropsychological) is inferred from a (the perceived physical occurrences) ;
we only claim that a logical dependency holds between the theoretical
content of the experiential constituents a and b; this can be proved by
the fact that b can be derived afterward by inference from a and prior
knowledge.

quite similar. (This rcsts upon the fact that El is actually a special case
)
the repreof E2.) If, for example, I see the beaming face of A ( ~ 2 then
sentation of the joy of A (b2) is simultaneously contained in my experience without my having to infer it. However, in order to know that
A is in a joyful mood, I do not have to utilize constituent b2, since I can
infer it from a2 on the basis of prior experience concerning the meaning
of facial expressions.
OBJECTION. ("baby--objection"). It is sometimes assumed that a
small infant can react appropriately to the joyous or sad countenance of
his mother even before he has had any experience concerning the meaning of these facial expressions. Child psychology has made no final decision concerning this assumption, and we do not have to decide its correctness. Our epistemological result would not be invalidated even if an
adult, who could give a linguistic account of his experience, were able to
recognize a heteropsychological occurrence without appropriate prior
experience. Assume, for example, that such a person had an experience
consisting of a visual perception of the knit brow of A together with fear
of an outbreak of rage on the part of A. The epistemic evaluation should
not be of the following sort: "A has a knit brow; A is in a rage" (or in
physical language: "in a moment A will perceptively react in such and
such a way"), because the second sentence cannot be considered knowledge of the wrath of A if only a representation of this wrath of A occurs
in the experience. We can speak of knowledge only if there are prior
experiences on the basis of which the perceiver knows that if the forehead of a person has such and such an appearance, then rage can be
expected.
This case does not differ from a case where purely physical occurrences are recognized. Let us assume that a person who has never experienced, or heard about, the heat of a flame, sees one for the first time in
his life (without being able to perceive its heat), and that he nevertheless has the idea that it is hot. Even such a (nativist) assumption would
not contradict our empiricist conception that knowledge of the heat of
the flame can be gained only through experience. For, in order to possess the content of representation that the flame is hot not merely as
representational content, but as knowledge, one must have had perceptions (at least one) from which it can be inferred through induction that
a thing which looks such and such generally feels hot.

1

I,

5 . Epistemological Analysis of the Cognition of Heteropsychological
Occurrences
The logical analysis of experiences in which heteropsychological occurrences are recognized has shown that in all possible cases (El, Ez, E3)
constituent a (the perception of the physical) is epistemologically sui3cient, while constituent b (the idea of the recognized heteropsychological
occurrence) is dispensable relative to the former. Let us now undertake
the epistemological analysis of these experiences. We shall amve at the
conclusion that in each case constituent a is the epistemological nucleus,
while b is the secondary part. In order to show this we must now demonstrate that b is epistemologically, as well as logically, dependent upon a.
To establish this we have previously formulated two different criteria:
the justification of b on the basis of a, and the possibility of the erroneous assumption of b when a is given. Let us apply these criteria in turn
to the recognition of hcteropsychological occurrences.
The first method consists in ascertaining that, in order to support or
justify a cognition of type b, scientific procedure demands, and is satisfied with, a reference to a corresponding experiential constituent of kind
a. It is presupposed that the procedures of the particular special science
can be considered epistemologically unobjectionable. In our case we
have to go back to certain very general cognitional procedures of psychology, and we may suppose that our presupposition is fulfilled since
the various epistemological persuasions (even those which do not agree
with our thesis) have made no objection against these cognitional
procedures.
If a psychologist is to justify or defend against doubt the assertion

320

1

PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

that certain psychological events have taken place within subject A, then
no one will be satisfied if he claims that he has simply experienced or
clearly felt them. Rather, one demands of him that he should state in
which of the three ways, El, E,, E,, his knowledge was obtained. Of
course in case E, the psychologist does not have to be able to repeat
word for word what he has heard or read, though this would be the
safest justification and would in any case be regarded as sufficient. However, he must at least be able to report that he has heard or read some
words which were of such a nature that from them the particular psychological events of A can be inferred. Similarly in case E2: the most
satisfactory justification consists in describing observed expressive motions or other acts of A, and it is indispensable for any justification that
acts of A can be indicated from which the particular psychological events
of A can be inferred. Finally, in case E3 the justification is accomplished
through a description of the perceived outward circumstances of A and
his already known character. (The testing and justification of the [alleged] knowledge of the character of A does not belong here; it goes
back to earlier cognitive experiences of the psychologist which in turn
are of type El or E2.)
The second criterion that the relation nucleus-secondary part holds
between a and b is satisfied if we have evidence that in experiences of
this kind b may rest upon an error. We say that "b rests upon an error"
if it turns out afterward that the epistemic content of a, but not that of b,
was in fact present. This criterion is indeed fulfilled for experiences in
which we recognize heteropsychological occurrences. We must realize
that in an experience of type E l the report of A can be either a lie or
an error. This is always possible, no matter how unlikely it may be in
a particular case. This possibility would amount to the following: the
epistemic content of constituent a, (our knowledge of the words which
we have heard or read) corresponds with reality, but the content of b~
(our alleged knowledge of the reported psychological event of A) does
not. In an experience of type Ez, pretense is always a possibility (as in
the case of intentional deception or in play-acting). The case is the same
as before; the perceived facial expressions and actions are real, but the
(allegedly) recognized psychological events are not. Case E, does not
require any special discussion since here we were antecedently aware
that the recognition of the psychological event of A was only surmised
in spite of correctly perceived outward circumstances; that is to say we
were antecedently aware of the possibility of error.
We have now demonstrated that in all cases where heter~ps~chological

THE AIM OF EPISTEMOLOGY

1

321

occurrences are recognized, the epistemological nucleus of the experience in which the recognition takes place contains nothing but perceptions
of physical events.

6. Result. Survey of the Genealogy of Concepts
Our considerations have led to the result that any recognition of heteropsychological occurrences goes back to a recognition of a physical
event. That is to say any recognition of heteropsychological occurrences
has as its epistemological nucleus the perception of physical events. We
can also express this fact in the following way: heteropsychological objects are "epistemologically secondary" relative to physical objects; the
latter "primary" relative to the former. ("objects" is here meant in the
widest sense: entities, events, states, properties, etc.)
At this time we cannot give a detailed discussion of the philosophical
consequences of this result; but let us have a quick look at the corresponding relations between the other object types. Considerations similar to the above would show that cultural objects (in the sense of cultural
entities and processes) are epistemologically secondary relative to the
heteropsychological and physical. It would even be easier to demonstrate
this since there are hardly any emotional prejudices that would obscure
this fact. One would only have to show that the recognition of cultural
events (for example, of a religion) is based upon the recognition of psychological processes ("manifestations") in the bearers of that cultural
process and upon the recognition of its physical "documentations".
It can furthermore be shown that physical objects are epistemologically secondary relative to autopsychological objects, since the recognition
of physical objects depends upon perception.
If the investigations whose results are here sketched are actually carried out (this is the task of construction theory), one is led to the following stratified epistemological system of the four most important object
types (to be read from bottom to top) :

4. Cultural objects
3. Heteropsychological objects
2. Physical objects
1. Autopsychological objects
The objects within each of these levels can in turn also be organized
according to their epistemological reducibility. The h a 1 result is a
system of scientific objects or concepts which, from a few "basic con-

322

]

PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

cepts", leads in stepby-step construction to all the remaining concepts.
In this system each concept which can become the object of a scientific
statement has a definite place. The organization of concepts in this
system has a twofold significance. To begin with, each concept is
epistemologically secondary relative to the concept which stands below
it (as we have indicated for the four main levels). Furthermore, each
concept can be defined, that is, a definite description of it can be given by
referring only to concepts which stand below it. Hence the system is also
a derivational system, that is, a "genealogy of concepts". We will not
consider this any further at this point.

II. ELIMINATION OF PSEUDOPROBLEMS FROM
THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

THE MEANING CRITERION

7. Factual Content as a Criterion for the Meaningfulness of
Statements
The meaning of a statement lies in the fact that it expresses a (conceivable, not necessarily existing) state of affairs. If an (ostensible) statement
does not express a (conceivable) state of affairs, then it has no meaning;
it is only apparently a statement. If the statement expresses a state of
affairs then it is in any event meaningful; it is true if this state of affairs
exists, false if it does not exist. One can know that a statement is
meaningful even before one knows whether it is true or false.
If a statement contains only concepts which are already known and
recognized, then its meaning results from them. On the other hand, if a
statement contains a new concept or a concept whose legitimacy (scientific applicability) is in question, then its meaning must be indicated. For
this purpose it is necessary and sufficient to point out what experiential
conditions must be supposed to obtain in order for the statement to be
called true (not "to be true"), and under what conditions it is to be
called false. To begin with, this indication is sufficient; it is not necessarily to indicate, in addition, the "meaning of the concept".

EXAMPLE.The concept "Jupiter" can be introduced by the following
stipulation: the statement "Jupiter rumbles in place p at time t" is to be
called true if in place p at time t a thunder can be experienced; otherwise

328

1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS I N PHILOSOPHY

it is to be called false. Through this convention the statement has been
given a meaning even though nothing has been said about the meaning
of the concept "Jupiter"; for if I now tell somebody: "Jupiter is going to
rumble here at 12 o'clock" he knows what he can expect. If he satisfies
proper conditions (i.e., if he goes to the described place), he can have an
experience which either confirms or refutes my statement.
However, the demanded indication is also necessary. For if it were
considered permissible in science to make a statement whose correctness
can be neither definitely confirmed nor refuted by experience, then the
intrusion of obviously meaningless (pseudo) statements could not possibly be prevented.
EXAMPLE. Let us consider the following sequence of sign complexes
which become progressively more pointless. If the fist expression of this
sequence is to be considered meaningful (even if false), then it would
be difficult to introduce, without being arbitrary, a criterion which allows us to divide the sequence into meaningful and meaningless
expressions.
1. "Jupiter sits in this cloud (but the appearance of the cloud does not
indicate his presence, nor is there any other perceptual method through
which his presence can be recognized.) "; 2. "This rock is sad"; 3. "This
triangle is virtuous"; 4. "Berlin horse blue"; 5. "And or of which";
6. "bu ba bi"; 7.
(*-*"
. It will be admitted that (6) is just as
meaningless as (7). For even though (6) consists of signs (namely
letters) which otherwise occur in meaningful sentences, the way in which
they are put together makes the entire expression meaningless. The relation between (4) and (6) is not fundamentally different; (4) is just as
meaningless as (6) even though it is put together out of larger sign
complexes which otherwise occur in meaningful sentences. So much is
generally admitted. Now we must become clear that ( 3 ) and also (2)
are just as meaningless as (4) ; (2) and (3) consists of words which (in
contrast to (4)) are conjoined as their grammatical characters require
but not as their meaning does. It might seem at f i s t sight that there is an
essential difference between ( 3 ) and (4), but such an error would be
caused by a shortcoming of our ordinary language which allows the
construction of grammatically unobjectionable but meaningless sentences. Consequently it can easily happen that a pseudo sentence is
mistaken for a meaningful one. In some cases this has been very detrimental for philosophy; we shall see this later when we consider the theses
of realism and idealism. (The logistical language does not have this
shortcoming. We can decide for any given sentence stated in this language, including extralogical sentences, whether or not it is meaningful,
even if only the kind (not also the meaning) of the occurring signs is
'I-)

ELIMINATION OF PSEUDOPROBLEMS FROM THE THEORY OF KKOWLEDGE

1 327

known. As a consequence, the logistical language has great importance
for the testing of philosophical statements, but this feature is very little
known and utilized.)
I n order to give a more precise formulation to our thesis, let us first
introduce some definitions. If a statement p expresses the content of an
experience E, and if the statement q is either the same as p o r can be
derived from p and prior experiences, either through deductive o r inductive arguments, then we say that q is "supported by" the experience E.
A statement p is said to be "testable" if conditions can be indicated
under which an experience E would occur which supports p or the contradictory of p. A statement p is said to have "factual content", if experiences which would support p o r the contradictory of p are at least
conceivable, and if their characteristics can be indicated. I t follows
from these definitions that if a statement is testable, then it has always
factual content, but the converse does not generally hold. If it is impossible, not only for the moment, but in principle, to find an experience
which will support a given statement then that statement does not have
factual content.
EXAMPLES. The statement "in the next room is a three-legged
table" is testable; for one can indicate under what circumstances (going
there and looking) a perceptual experience of a certain kind would
occur which would support the statement. Hence this statement has
factual content. The statement "there is a certain red color whose sight
causes terror" is not testable, for we do not know how to find an experience which would support this statement. Nevertheless, this statement
has factual content, for we can think and describe the characteristics of
an experience through which this statement would be supported. Such an
experience would have to contain the visual perception of a red color
and at the same time the feeling of terror about this color. The pseudo
statements ( I ) , (2), ( 3 ) of the preceding example do not have factual
content.

If a statement is supported only through past experiences and can no
longer be tested, then we do not place the same confidence in it as in a
testable statement. I n history, geography, anthropology, one frequently
must be satisfied with statements of this kind; in physics it is generally
required that a statement be testable. But if we neglect the degree of
certainty of a statement and concentrate only on the question of its
meaningfulness, then there is no difference between those statements
that have been supported earlier and can n o longer be tested, and those

328

1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

ELIMINATION OF PSEUDOPROBLEMS FROM THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

that can be tested at any given time; both kinds of statement are
certainly meaningful, hence, either true or false. On the other hand
there can be a difference of opinion about those statements which are
neither testable nor have so far been supported. No decisive objection
can be made if someone wants to be so strict as to ban all such statements from science. However it must be mentioned that the customary
method of the empirical sciences, including physics, does not consider
statements of this kind as meaningless, but admits them either as
hypotheses, preliminary conjectures, or at least as statements that permit
the formulation of certain problems. Hence we shall not adopt this strict
rule and shall acknowledge statements of this kind as meaningful (but by
no means as true); statements which have factual content are meaningful
since it is at least conceivable that they will at one time or another be
recognized as true or false. However, expressions that are not included
among statements with factual content must under no circumstances be
considered meaningful. A (pseudo) statement which cannot in principle
be supported by an experience, and which therefore does not have any
factual content would not express any conceivable state of affairs and
therefore would not be a statement, but only a conglomeration of meaningless marks or noises.
All empirical sciences (natural sciences, psychology, cultural sciences)
acknowledge and carry out in practice the requirement that every statement must have factual content. It makes no difference whether we are
concerned with mineralogy, biology, or the science of religion: each
statement which is to be considered meaningful in any one of these fields
(i.e., which is either considered true or false or which is posed as a
question) either goes directly back to experience, that is, the content
of experiences, or it is at least indirectly connected with experience in
such a way that it can be indicated which possible experience would
confirm or refute it; that is to say, it is itself supported by experiences,
or it is testable, or it has at least factual content. Only in the fields of
philosophy (and theology) ostensible statements occur which do not have
factual content; as we shall see later, the theses of realism and idealism
are examples. We have not taken the strict viewpoint which requires of
each statement that it should be supported or testable; rather, we consider statements meaningful even if they merely have factual content, but
are neither supported nor testable. Hence we are using as liberal a
criterion of meaningfulness as the most liberal-minded physicist or
historian would use within his own science; therefore our refutation of
the theses of realism and idealism will become all the more compelling.

1

329

8. Theoretical Content of a Statement and Accompanying
Representations
Generally speaking, if we utter a statement or merely think one, our
train of ideas 8 goes beyond the bare content of this statement. For
example, if I say "that bench is small", my mental representation may
depict the bench as being green, while the statement does not mention this
fact. It is well known that in deductions from given premises errors
frequently arise because in addition to the facts which form the content
of the premises, other facts, which are mentally associated with them,
are unawares used in the deduction.
Let us now distinguish two types of representations (or complexes or
sequences of representations; it is not necessary to distinguish these).
We call a representation "factual" if its content is meant to be a fact,
that is, something which either takes place or does not take place, so that
one can say either yes or no to the content of such a representation; all
other representations are called "object representations." For example,
if I have a representation of a certain person in a certain environment,
and if I believe that this person is now in this environment, then the
representation is factual; it is either true or false. On the other hand if
I merely think of that person in that environment but hold no belief
concerning place or time, then I have an object representation. However,
a simple representation of a person without any determination of place or
time can be factual if a certain property is claimed to be present, for
example, that this person has hair of such and such a color. Hence it
depends essentially upon a person's intention whether a representation
is a factual or a mere object representation; in the first case the experience contains an act of judgment which either affirms or denies that the
particular fact exists. From the indicated difference between the two
types of representations the following distinction, which is important for
our investigation, results: a factual representation can form the content
of a statement, while an object representation cannot. The linguistic
expression for the content of an object expression is a noun (which may
be accompanied by an adjective, apposition, etc.). (In the terminology
of Meinong's theory of objects: the content of an object representation
is an "object", a content of a factual representation is an "objective".)
EXAMPLES. 1. Expression for object representations: "my son",
"a person who looks such and such". 2. Expression for factual reprea Vorstellungsablauf

L

330

1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

sentations: "my son looks so and so", "there exists a person who looks
such and such".
We must divide the representations which one experiences as one
utters or thinks a statement into stated and accompanying representations. Among the accompanying representations there may in turn occur
factual representations as well as mere object rcprcscntations. In the case
of the statement "that bench is small" the representation of the smallness
of the bench is the stated representation. The representation of the
greenness of the bench is an accompanying representation; since it is a
factual representation one could add it to the content of the statement by
making the additional statement "that bench is green". Assume now that
the utterance of the statement "that bench is small" causes in me the
representation of a certain musical tone and perhaps also that of a happy
mood. These representations are then mere object representations; they
do not belong to the facts about the bench; hence they cannot be
admitted into any statement about the bench: we cannot attribute the
sound or the happy mood to the bench. If we nevertheless try (perhaps
misled by a, in this case, pointless inclination to judge), then we obtain
pseudo statements, meaningless collections of signs. The accompanying
object representations, since they cannot become the content of statements, are beyond truth and falsity. While the theoretical content of a
statement must be justified by reference to some criterion, for example
the indicated criterion of factual content, the object representations which
accompany a statement are not subject to any theoretical control; they
are theoretically irrelevant but frequently of great practical importance.
To imagine certain configurations of numbers, or the sounds of number
words or point configurations when we speak or think of, e.g., the statement "2 plus 2 equals 4" facilitates greatly the learning and deductive
manipulation of such statements. Diagrams in geometry play a similar
role. The formalization of geometry which has been carried out during
the last decade has shown that the graphic properties of the diagrams are
a valuable practical aid for research or learning, but that they must not
play any role in geometrical deduction.
Occasionally we do not want to leave the occurrence of accompanying
object representations to chance but, because of their practical value,
want to evoke them systematically in ourselves or others. This can be
achieved by choosing appropriate names for the concepts or by choosing
an appropriate linguistic form for the entire statement (in the case of an
oral statement also through intonation, melody, accompanying gestures,
etc.). After all, the choice of a name is independent of the theoretical

ELIMINATION OF PSEUDOPROBLEMS FROM THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 1 331

content of a statement: it is purely conventional. This allows us to express
the accompanying object representations, which are also independent of
the theoretical content, in any way we deem appropriate.
EXAMPLES. Formalized geometry (cf. for example Hilbert, Foundations of Geometry) does not speak of spatial entities, but of indeter-

minate objects which are related in a certain way. However we do not
customarily designate the basic objects of first, second, and third type
with this neutral expression but with the words "point", "straight line",
"surface", since we wish that the reader should connect representations
of little black spots, of straight lines, and of thin flat slices with the
statements about the basic objects. (This is done only to facilitate matters
and has nothing to do with questions of theoretical validity.)
When an Indian calls his child "Black Buffalo", then whoever uses this
name has the awe-inspiring or respect-evoking accompanying representation of that animal. Here an accompanying representation is expressed
which cannot be expressed through a statement, since it does not reflect
any fact. The Indian however thinks that, by giving this name, a certain
(hoped for) fact is expressed; philosophers, as we shall see, have hoped
to accomplish the same by giving suitable names to heteropsychological
objects.

ELIMINATION OF PSEUDOPROBLEMS FROM THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 1

APPLICATION TO THE
REALZSM CONTROVERSY

333

first be affirmatively answered before the question of the validity or
invalidity of the theses can even be raised. According to our previous
results, to ask whether they are meaningful is to ask: do these theses
express a fact (no matter whether an existent or nonexistent one) or
are they merely pseudo statements, made with the vain intention of
expressing accompanying object representation in the form of statements,
as if they were factual representations? We shall find that the latter is
indeed the case, so that these theses have no content; they are not statements at all. Hence the question about the correctness of these theses
cannot be raised. In the realism controversy, science can take neither an
affirmative nor a negative position since the question has no meaning.
We want to show this in the sequel.

10. The Reality of the External World

9. The Theses of Realism and Idealism
By the thesis of realism we shall understand the following two subtheses:
1. the perceived physical things which surround me are not only the
content of my perception, but, in addition, they exist in themselves
("reality of the external world"); 2. the bodies of other persons not only
exhibit perceivable reactions similar to those of my body, but, in addition,
these other persons have consciousness ("reality of the heteropsychological"). The thesis of idealism is identified with the corresponding
denials (the second of them however is maintained only by a certain
radical idealistic position, namely solipsism): 1. the external world is
not itself real, but only the perceptions or representations of it are ("nonreality of the external world"); 2. only my own processes of consciousness are real; the so-called conscious processes of others are merely
constructions or even fictions ("nonreality of the heteropsychologica~')~
It is not our intention here to ask which of the two theses is correct.
(If we wanted to do this we would have to investigate the validity of the
subtheses separately.) Rather, we shall raise the more fundamental
question whether the indicated theses have any scientific meaning,
whether they have any content to which science can take either an
aflknative or a negative stand. This more fundamental question must

Two geographers, a realist and an idealist, who are sent out in order to
find out if a mountain that is supposed to be somewhere in Africa is
only legendary or if it really exists, will come to the same (positive or
negative) result. In physics as well as geography there are certain
criteria for the concept of reality in this sense-we want to call it
"empirical realityw--which always lead to definite results no matter
what the philosophical persuasion of the researcher. The two geographers
will come to the same result not only about the existence of the mountain, but also about its other characteristics, namely position, shape,
height, etc. In all empirical questions there is unanimity. Hence the
choice of a philosophical viewpoint has no influence upon the content of
natural science; (this does not mean that it could not have some practical
influence upon the activity of the scientist).
There is disagreement between the two scientists only when they no
longer speak as geographers but as philosophers, when they give a philosophical interpretation of the empirical results about which they agree.
Then the realist says: "this mountain, which the two of us have found, not
only has the ascertained geographical properties, but is, in addition, also
real," and the "phenomenalist" (subvariety of realism) says: "the mountain which we have found is supported by something real which we
cannot itself know." The idealist on the other hand says: "on the
contrary, the mountain itself is not real, only our (or in the case of the
"solipsist" variety of idealism: "only my") perceptions and conscious
processes are real." This divergence between the two scientists does not
occur in the empirical domain, for there is complete unanimity so far

334

1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

as the empirical facts are concerned. These two theses which are here in
opposition to one another go beyond experience and have no factual
content. Neither of the disputants suggests that his thesis should be
tested through some joint decisive experiment, nor does any one of them
give an indication of the design of an experiment through which his thesis
could be supported.
Our example can easily be generalized. What is true for the mountain
is true for the external world in general. Since we consider only factual
content as the criterion for the meaningfulness of statements, neither the
thesis of realism that the external world is real, nor that of idealism that
the external world is not real can be considered scientifically meaningful.
This does not mean that the two theses are false; rather, they have no
meaning at aU so that the question of their truth and falsity cannot even
be posed.
In the case of the second part of the realist thesis, which concerns
the heteropsychological, we shall see that the formulation of this theoretically meaningless thesis must be considered the result of a wish to
express an accompanying object representation. Perhaps the same is true
for the first part of this thesis. Conceivably the realist thesis is due to
certain emotional accompaniments, for example, the feeling of unfamiliarity with the mountain, the feeling that in many ways it is not
subject to, or even resists, my will, and similar feelings. This problem
can be only suggested at this time.

1 1 . T h e Reality of the Heteropsychological
We have seen earlier ( $ 5) that in each particular case the recognition of
the heteropsychological goes back to the recognition of physical occurrences. And not only in the sense that in each case simultaneously with
the recognition of a heteropsychological occurrence somehow the recognition of a physical occurrence takes place, but in such a way that the
heteropsychological with all its characteristics depends upon the recognition of the corresponding physical occurrence. Hence one could translate
any statement about a given heteropsychological occurrence, for example
"A is now joyful", into a statement which mentions only physical
occurrences, namely expressive motions, acts, words, etc. This statement
could mention either those physical occurrences (expressive motions,
etc.) which have led to the recognition of the joy of A, that is, it could
speak of the content of perceptions that have already been experienced;
or it could indicate ways of testing A's joy. In the latter case it is a con-

I

ELIMINATION OF PSEUDOPROBLEMS FROM THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

1 335

ditional statement of the form: if A is now subject to such and such
conditions, then such and such (physical, perceivable) reaction will take
place.
Hence we are here confronted with two different languages, one of
them psychological and one physical; we maintain that they both express
the same theoretical content. It will be objected that in the statement "A
is joyful" we express more than in the corresponding physical statement.
This is indeed the case. Aside from having the advantage of much greater
simplicity, the psychological language also expresses more than the
physical language, but this more does not consist of additional theoretical
content; it expresses only accompanying representations; these are merely
object representations, that is, representations which do not stand for
any fact, and hence which cannot form the content of a statement. They
are expressed by choosing a certain language (while other accompanying
features, which also do not belong to the theoretical content, are expressed, e.g., by the intonation, gestures, etc.). For by saying "A is
joyful" and not merely "A shows facial expressions of such and such a
form", I express that I have a representation of a feeling of joy, although
a feeling of joy in the autopsychological sense, since I cannot know any
other. However, to assume that by using the psychological instead of the
physical language, that is to say, by using the expression "joy" instead of
"facial expressions of such and such a form", we express a fact which
goes beyond the physical state of affairs, is to confuse the theoretical
content of the statement with an accompanying representation.
With this confusion one would commit an error even more serious
than that of the Indian (5 8 ) ; for the accompanying representation of
the Indian led him, even if erroneously, to the factual representation
which, roughly speaking, could be expressed by the statement: "my son
is as strong as a buffalo." In the present case however, we are not merely
induced to make an erroneous statement, but a pseudo statement. For no
fact is even conceivable or stateable which could connect the representation "feeling of joy" (in the autopsychological sense) with the behavior
of A.
Let us again think of two scientists, this time psychologists; let one of
them be a solipsist, the other a nonsolipsistic idealist or realist. (The
dividing line runs here a somewhat different course than before, but this
is not important to our discussion, since we do not want to find out which
of the two opposing parties is correct; we only wish to show that the
entire controversy is scientifically meaningless.) Our two scientists decide

336

1

PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

on the basis of empirical criteria of psychology whether A's joy is real or
only simulated (empirical concept of reality), and thus come to an agreement (just as the above-mentioned two geographers did when the reality
of the mountain was in question). However, if they then move from
psychology to philosophy, a controversy arises. The solipsist claims that
only the observed physical behavior of A (including his words) is real;
he adds that he wants to describe this behavior with the expression "A
is joyful", since the psychological language, in contrast with the physical
language, not only has the advantage of brevity, but also that of stimulating a more appropriate accompanying representation; but the solipsist
does not hold the consciousness of A to be real. His opponent on the
other hand, claims that A shows not only the given physical behavior,
through which the statement "A is joyful'' is supported (witness the
common iindings of the two psychologists), but that, in addition, A
really has consciousness.
As concerns the physical and observable, hence the only testable,
both psychologists agree. There is no psychological question to which,
after sufficiently extensive investigations, the two would not give the
same answer. This shows that the choice of the philosophical standpoint
has no influence upon the content of psychology (just as it has no
influence upon natural science). (Here again the possibility of practical
influence is not denied.) The divergence between the two standpoints
occurs beyond the factual, in a domain where in principle^ no experience
is possible; hence, according to our criterion, they have no scientific
sigmficance.
One could perhaps make the following objection: the two psychologists do in fact make the same utterance within psychology but they
mean somethiig different; when both of them say: "A is now joyful," the
solipsist does not mean anything but: "A shows such and such reactions,"
while his opponent means, in addition, the presence of a certain feeling
of joy. In order to show more clearly how things lie, let us refer to an
analogous situation which has occurred several times in the development
of mathematics and was caused by the critical investigations of the last
century. We previously mentioned the concept of a differential quotient;
now we want to use the concept of the irrational numbers as an example.
Logical investigations (by Dedekind, Frege, Russell) have shown that it
is not the case that, in addition to rational numbers, there are others that
can be inserted into the sequence of rational numbers, but that every
statement about an irrational number (for example, about v2) is an
abbreviation for a statement about a class (or property) of rational

ELIMINATION OF PSEUDOPROBLEMS FROM THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

1

337

numbers that produces a cut in the sequence of rational numbers. The
following objection was frequently made: "but the mathematicians mean
something different than a class of rational numbers when they speak of
the irrational number d z and similarly in the case of geometry (cf. the
example in $ 8) : "but the mathematician, when they speak of points and
straight lines, in geometry, mean something other than the indeterminate
objects which are merely related in a certain way." These objections, and
similarly the analogous objections about what the psychologists mean,
are correct if by "meaning" we mean the train of representation which
accompanies the conception of the statement in question. For this process
can indeed be different, depending upon which mode of speech is
adopted: the mode of speech involving "rational number" or that using
"irrational numbers", the mode of speech which employs "basic objects
of fist, second, and third kind" or that using "points, straight lines,
surfaces", the physical or the psychological language. However, the decisive factor is that in each of these cases the difference lies only in the
accompanying object representation, not in the theoretical content of the
statements. If somebody denies this, he has the obligation of formulating
the meaningful, that is factual, substatements which he claims to be
contained in a statement of the psychological language, but not in the
corresponding statement of the physical language; that there is some
information which is not contained in the statement of the physical language must be demonstrated by showing that the substatement to be
formulated can be false in cases in which the physical statement is true.
Another objection ("worm--objection") points to the differences in
the practical effect of the two statements. It runs something like this: the
statement "this animal has consciousness" must contain more than the
mere report that this animal shows certain observable reactions to given
stimuli; for this statement influences my actions; for if I know that the
worm feels pain, I do not step on it, while the mere observation that it
writhes does not necessarily prevent me from doing so. This objection,
too, is correct; from the viewpoint of practical inference the first statement contains more than the second; but again this additional content is
only an object representation, namely that of the sensation of pain;
hence this is a case of empathy. Empathy is not cognition; it does not
produce any theoretical content or anything that can be stated; it is
doing, not cognizing; it is a doing which establishes contact with the other
and thus leads to a diierent practical orientation and consequently to
different external actions. But all this is a practical, not a theoretical
matter. EthicaI values come into play, but there is no c o ~ e c t i o nwith

538

1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHIWSOPW

truth and falsity. The theses "A merely behaves as if he had consciousness, while in reality he has none" and "A really has consciousness" are
therefore only pseudo theses; they are not statements (in the theoretical
sense); one can not judge them to be either "true" or "false". However
one can respond aflirmatively or negatively depending on whether or not
one takes these words to express a practical position which one wants
to adopt. (However, it is still questionable if a statement, that is to say a
form of words which normally has theoretical content, is the most
appropriate way of expressing such a practical orientation.)
Even though empathy is not cognition, it has great practical, that is
heuristic, value for science (especially for psychology, the cultural sciences, and biology but occasionally also for physics). For the psychologist it is practically a necessity. There is as little chance of finding a
psychologist who works without using empathy, as there is of finding a
mathematician who works without the heuristic aid of perception. (Even
the solipsistic psychologist employs empathy.) In spite of its extraordinary heuristic value, empathy is not, in principle, a necessity for
psychology. Imagine a psychologist who does not use empathy but
merely subjects the observed behavior of his subjects to rational analysis,
and describes it in psychological Ianguage. He nevertheless ought to
reach any result which can be obtained through empathy (even though
perhaps much later); a psychologist who employs empathy must still
give a rational justification, that is, a justification that does not depend
upon empathy, for all the results which are obtained through empathy
(cf. ยง 5).
Matters are different with historical accounts: frequently such an
account would fail in its main purpose if one were to eschew the use of
empathy altogether. For such an account is not generally scientifically
oriented; its purpose is not predominantly theoretical, that is, with an
aim for knowledge, but practical: it is to enrich life through participation,
or is to direct actions in a certain way. To the extent to which this is so,
history is not science, but practical activity which uses science as an aid;
in this case the demand for the rational justification of empathy holds
only for the scientific component.
It would be worth some effort to investigate the importance of the
confusion of accompanying object representations with factual representations for the history of ideas; more precisely, the importance of the
attempt, arising from this confusion, of expressing accompanying object
representation through (pseudo) statements. Perhaps the origin of magic
(as theory), mythology (including theology), and metaphysics, is to be
explained in this way; not as if we could explain the content of such

SUMMARY

1

330

doctrines in this way, but some light would be shed on the strange
circumstance that this content was not expressed through artistic media
or through the practical conduct of life, but was given the form of a
theory which has no theoretical content.

SUMMARY
I. THEAIM OF EPISTEMOLOGY
A. The Meaning of Epistemological Analysis
$ 1. Aim of epistemology: justification, "reduction" of one cognition to
another, analysis of the contents of experiences. Results of analyses
are available, but their meaning is not exactly known. Problem:
what is the meaning of the epistemological analysis of the content of
an experience, if it is to be different from genetic-psychological
analysis?
8 2. The first step of epistemological analysis consists in the logical
analysis of the content of an experience into two parts: a "sufficient"
and a "dispensable" constituent. The second constituent does not give
any new knowledge over and above the first one; its theoretical content can be found in a "rational reconstruction" through inference
from the first.
5 3. The epistemological analysis divides the content of an experience
into "nucleus" (a) and "secondary part" (b). This division is characterized by the fact that b is a dispensable part relative to a and,
secondly, that b is epistemically secondary to a. Criteria for this are:
1. A (scientific) justification of the cognition of the content of b can
be given only by referring to a; 2. the theoretical content of b can
rest upon an error even though a has been correctly recognized.
B. Application: Knowledge of the Heteropsychological
f 4. The recognition, in experience, of a heteropsychological occurrence
always contains a constituent (a) which is connected with physical
occurrences, and a constituent (b) which represents the heteropsychological. In such a case b is always dispensable relative to a, which
can be shown through the method of rational reconstruction.
$ 5. Furthermore, a is always the nucleus of the experience. For, the
scientific justification of the recognition of content b always refers to
a; moreover, on the basis of a we can always be deceived about b.
f 6. Result: only perceptions of physical events belong to the nucleus of
experiences in which we recognize heteropsychological occurrences.
The heteropsychological is "epistemically secondary" to the physical.
An analysis of epistemic primacy (which is not here carried out)
would show the following rank order: autopsychological, physical,

340

1

PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

heteropsychological, cultural; in addition, this analysis would lead to
a complete genealogy of concepts.
11. ~ L I M I N A T ~ OOF
N PSEUDOPROBLEMS
FROM THE THEORYOF KNOWLEDGE
Theses:
1. Only statements with factual content are theoretically meaningful;
(ostensible) statements which cannot, in principle, be supported by
experience are meaningless.
2. The empirical sciences use only the empirical concept of reality.
3. Philosophy uses a nonempirical (metaphysical) concept of reality:
a. the theses of realism and idealism concerning the external world
have no factual content;
b. the same holds for the theses of realism and solipsism about the
heteropsychological.
4. The theses of realism and idealism can neither be supported nor
refuted within a science; they have no scientific meaning.
5. The pseudo theses of realism and idealism express, not the theoretical
content of a scientifically permissible statement, but only accompanying object representation; conceivably they express a certain practical
orientation toward life.

CLASSIFICATION OF POSSIBLE OPPOSING VIEWPOINTS 1

341

CLASSIFICATION OF POSSIBLE OPPOSING VIEWPOINTS
Whoever wishes to contradict the indicated position, especially if he
wants to claim scientific status for a thesis of realism or idealism, must
take one of the following viewpoints; our reply ("Rpl.") is given in each
case.
I. It is claimed that factual content is not a criterion for scientScally
meaningful statements. Hence, a certain nontautological statement
(which we shall call p), for example one of the theses of realism or
idealism, is taken to be meaningful, even though it does not have factual
content. Then it is necessary to find a new criterion for the meaningfulness of statement which is more extensive than the criterion of factual
content.
This can be done in various ways; let us first classify the different
conceptions of p:
1. p does not designate any fact. Rpl.: then p is meaningless; for
what else but a fact can a statement express? In what sense could
something be called "true" or "false" if it does not designate an existing or nonexisting fact?
2. p does designate a fact.
a. This fact is in principle unrecognizable. Rpl.: then p is meaningless, for how can p be distinguished from a meaningless
combination of signs, if the alleged content of p is something
that cannot become the content of any experience?
b. The fact, though recognizable, is not empirically recognizable
(for otherwise p would have factual content). Rpl.: All knowledge rests upon experience ("experience" is taken in the widest
sense, as the theoretical content of experiences of any kind).
The following classification cuts across the division 1-2:
1'. A new, expanded criterion for the meaningfulness of statements is
narrow enough so that it just admits p (and certain other desired
statements); on the other hand, obviously meaningless statements
which are not to be given scientific status (for example, the abovementioned statement of Jupiter hidden in a cloud, ยง 7), do not
fulfill the criterion.
Here we can again distinguish two possibilities, not relative to the
content of the criterion, but relative to the status it would have in its
present form:
a. The new criterion is already formulated. Rpl.: it must be demonstrated that obviously meaningless statements do not fulfill it.

342

1 PSEUDOPROBLEMS IN PHILOSOPHY

b. It is assumed that a criterion of the indicated kind must exist, but
it cannot yet be stated. Rpl.: in this case no actual position is
maintained, there is only an intention to look in a certain
direction for an as yet undetermined position.
2'. The new criterion is not narrowly limited in the indicated way but
has a wide compass (for example: "any utterance of any person
which has influence upon my actions will be considered scientifically
meaningful" or something like this). Rpl.: then expressions such as a
bang with the fist on the table, a cry of joy, a lyric poem must all be
considered scientifically meaningful statements.
11. Factual content is taken to be a criterion. However, it is held that one
of the two theses, namely realism or idealism, has factual content. We
distinguish two cases depending upon the field to which the supposedly
factual thesis relates:
1. The thesis relates to the heteropsychological alone. Question: Is the
(alleged or denied) "reality of the heteropsychological" understood in
such a way that the theoretical content of the statement "A is joyful" exceeds the theoretical content of the corresponding physical
statement?
a. Yes. Rpl.: Then there exists an obligation to indicate the constituent which goes beyond this physical statement, and to show
that it can be supported (i.e., the characteristics of the experiential content which would confirm or disprove it must be indicated). If the theoretical content, and not only the accompanying
object representation, of a statement p exceeds that of statement
q, then there is a statement r (which we call "the constituent in
which p exceeds q") of the following kind: r is independent of q;
the content of p includes the content of r and q (conjunction). In
our case p is the statement "A is joyful," q the corresponding
physical statement; now we ought to be able to find an r of the
following sort: r is always true whenever p is true; r may be
false when q is true; r has factual content. (For a precise formulation, the statements p, q, and r must be replaced by propositional functions with time variables.)
b. No. Rpl.: Then there is no conflict with our viewpoint. There
only remains the terminological question whether in this case, one
should still speak of "realism", "idealism", or "solipsism".
2. The thesis relates (in addition or exclusively) to the external world.
Question: "does reality of the external world" mean that the theoretical content of the statement "Mont Blanc really exists" has a
constituent in which it exceeds the theoretical content of the corresponding statements about perceptions?

CLASSIFICATION OF POSSIBLE OPPOSING VIEWPOINTS

1

343

a. Yes. Rpl.: then there exists an obligation to identify that constituent and show how it can be supported (cf. 1, a).
b. No. Rpl.: see 1, b.
For the sake of clarity, all critics are requested to admit explicitly to one
of these viewpoints.

