The Shorter Logical Investigations

HH

The Shorter Logical
Investigations

Edmund Husserl
Translated by J. N. Findlay
from the Second German edition of Logische Untersuchungen
with a new Preface by Michael Dummett
and edited and abridged with a new Introduction by
Dermot Moran

London and New York

Logische Untersuchungen ﬁrst published in German
by M. Niemeyer, Halle 1900, 1901
Second German edition, Vol. I and Vol. II, Part I, ﬁrst published 1913
This abridged edition ﬁrst published 2001
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2002.
Translation © 1970 J. N. Findlay
Preface © 2001 Michael Dummett
Introduction and editorial matter © 2001 Dermot Moran
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording,
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN 0-415-24192-8 (Print Edition)
ISBN 0-203-42003-9 Master e-book ISBN

ISBN 0-203-44523-6 (Adobe eReader Format)

Dedicated to
Carl Stumpf
With Honour and in Friendship

HH

Contents

Preface by Michael Dummett
Introduction by Dermot Moran
Select bibliography
Translator’s Introduction (Abridged)

xxi
xxv
lxxix
lxxxiii

Foreword to First German Edition, Volume I (1900)
Foreword to Second German Edition, Volume I (1913)

1
3

PROLEGOMENA TO PURE LOGIC
Volume I of the German Editions

9

INTRODUCTION

§1 The controversy regarding the deﬁnition of logic and the
essential content of its doctrines
§2 Necessity of a renewed discussion of questions of principle
§3 Disputed questions. The path to be entered

11
11
12
13

CHAPTER ONE

Logic as a normative and, in particular, as a practical discipline

15

§4 The theoretical incompleteness of the separate sciences
§5 The theoretical completion of the separate sciences by
metaphysics and theory of science
§6 The possibility and justiﬁcation of logic as theory of science
§10 The ideas of theory and science as problems of the theory of
science
§11 Logic or theory of science as normative discipline and as
technology
§12 Relevant deﬁnitions of logic

15
16
16
19
20
21

viii Contents
CHAPTER TWO

Theoretical disciplines as the foundation of normative disciplines
§14 The concept of a normative science. The basic standard or
principle that gives it unity
§15 Normative disciplines and technologies
§16 Theoretical disciplines as the foundation of normative
disciplines

23
23
27
27

CHAPTER THREE

Psychologism, its arguments and its attitude to the usual counter-arguments
§17 The disputed question as to whether the essential theoretical
foundations of normative logic lie in psychology
§18 The line of proof of the psychologistic thinkers
§19 The usual arguments of the opposition and the psychologistic
rejoinder
§20 A gap in the psychologistic line of proof

30
30
31
31
34

CHAPTER FOUR

Empiricistic consequences of psychologism

36

§22 The laws of thought as supposed laws of nature which operate
in isolation as causes of rational thought
§23 A third consequence of psychologism, and its refutation
§24 Continuation

36
38
41

CHAPTER SEVEN

Psychologism as a sceptical relativism
§32 The ideal conditions for the possibility of a theory as such.
The strict concept of scepticism
§33 Scepticism in the metaphysical sense
§34 The concept of relativism and its speciﬁc forms
§35 Critique of individual relativism
§36 Critique of speciﬁc relativism and, in particular, of
anthropologism
§37 General observation. The concept of relativism in an
extended sense
§38 Psychologism in all its forms is a relativism

44
44
45
46
47
47
51
51

CHAPTER EIGHT

The psychologistic prejudices

53

§41 First prejudice
§44 Second prejudice

53
55

Contents

§45 Refutation. Pure mathematics would likewise be made a
branch of psychology
§46 The research domain of pure logic is, like that of mathematics,
an ideal domain
§49 Third prejudice. Logic as the theory of evidence
§50 Transformation of logical propositions into equivalent
propositions about the ideal conditions for evidence of
judgement. The resultant propositions are not psychological
§51 The decisive points in this dispute

ix

56
57
59

60
63

CHAPTER TEN

End of our critical treatments

67

§61 Need for special investigations to provide an epistemological
justiﬁcation and partial realization of the Idea of pure logic

67

Appendix: References to F. A. Lange and B. Bolzano

68

CHAPTER ELEVEN

The idea of pure logic
§62 The unity of science. The interconnection of things and the
interconnection of truths
§63 Continuation. The unity of theory
§65 The question as to the ideal conditions of the possibility of
science or of theory in general. A. The question as it relates
to actual knowledge
§66 B. The question as it relates to the content of knowledge
§67 The tasks of pure logic. First: the ﬁxing of the pure categories
of meaning, the pure categories of objects and their
law-governed combinations
§68 Secondly: the laws and theories which have their grounds in
these categories
§69 Thirdly: the theory of the possible forms of theories or the
pure theory of manifolds

71
71
73

74
76

78
79
80

INVESTIGATIONS INTO PHENOMENOLOGY AND
THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
Volume II, Part 1 of the German Editions
INTRODUCTION

§1 The necessity of phenomenological investigations as a
preliminary to the epistemological criticism and clariﬁcation
of pure logic

85
85

85

x Contents

§2 Elucidation of the aims of such investigations
§3 The difﬁculties of pure phenomenological analysis
§4 It is essential to keep in mind the grammatical side of our
logical experiences
§5 Statement of the main aims of the following analytical
investigations
§6 Additional Notes
§7 ‘Freedom from presuppositions’ as a principle in
epistemological investigations

INVESTIGATION I
EXPRESSION AND MEANING

86
90
92
93
94
97

101

CHAPTER ONE

Essential distinctions

103

§1 An ambiguity in the term ‘sign’
§2 The essence of indication
§5 Expressions as meaningful signs. Setting aside of a sense of
‘expression’ not relevant for our purpose
§6 Questions as to the phenomenological and intentional
distinctions which pertain to expressions as such
§7 Expressions as they function in communication
§8 Expressions in solitary life
§9 Phenomenological distinctions between the physical appearance
of the expression, and the sense-giving and sense-fulﬁlling act
§10 The phenomenological unity of these acts
§11 The ideal distinctions: ﬁrstly, between expression and meaning
as ideal entities
§12 Continuation: the expressed objectivity
§13 Connection between meaning and objective reference
§14 Content as object, content as fulﬁlling sense and content as
sense or meaning simpliciter
§15 The equivocations in talk of meaning and meaninglessness
connected with these distinctions

103
103
104
105
106
107
108
110
112
114
115
116
117

CHAPTER THREE

Fluctuation in meaning and the ideality of unities of meaning

121

§24 Introduction
§25 Relations of coincidence among the contents of intimation
and naming
§26 Essentially occasional and objective expressions
§29 Pure logic and ideal meanings

121
121
122
126

Contents

INVESTIGATION II
THE IDEAL UNITY OF THE SPECIES AND
MODERN THEORIES OF ABSTRACTION
Introduction

xi

131
133

CHAPTER ONE

Universal objects and the consciousness of universality
§1 We are conscious of universal objects in acts which differ
essentially from those in which we are conscious of individual
objects
§2 The indispensability of talk about universal objects
§3 Must the unity of the Species be regarded as a spurious unity?
Identity and exact likeness
§4 Objections to the reduction of ideal unity to dispersed
multiplicity
§6 Transition to the following chapters

135

135
136
137
138
140

CHAPTER TWO

The psychological hypostatization of the universal
§7 The metaphysical and psychological hypostatization of the
universal. Nominalism
§8 A deceptive line of thought

142
142
143

CHAPTER THREE

Abstraction and attention
§14 Objections to any and every form of nominalism.
(a) The lack of a descriptive ﬁxation of aims
§15 (b) The origin of modern nominalism as an exaggerated
reaction to Locke’s doctrine of general ideas. The essential
character of this nominalism, and of the theory of abstraction
in terms of attention
§16 (c) Generality of psychological function and generality as a
meaning-form. Different senses of the relation of a universal
to an extension
§17 (d ) Application to the critique of nominalism
§21 The difference between attending to a non-independent
moment of an intuited object and attending to the
corresponding attribute in specie
§22 Fundamental deﬁciencies in the phenomenological analysis of
attention
§23 Signiﬁcant talk of attention embraces the whole sphere of
thinking and not merely the sphere of intuition

145
145

147

149
151

151
153
155

xii Contents
CHAPTER FOUR

Abstraction and representation

158

§24 The general idea as a device for economizing thought

158

INVESTIGATION III
ON THE THEORY OF WHOLES AND PARTS

161

Introduction

163

CHAPTER ONE

The difference between independent and non-independent objects

164

§1 Complex and simple, articulated and unarticulated objects
§2 Introduction of the distinction between independent and
non-independent objects (contents)
§3 The inseparability of non-independent contents
§4 Analyses of examples following Stumpf
§10 The multiplicity of laws governing the various sorts of
non-independent contents
§11 The difference between these ‘material’ laws and ‘formal’ or
‘analytic’ laws
§12 Basic determinations in regard to analytic and synthetic
propositions

164
165
166
167
169
170
172

CHAPTER TWO

Thoughts towards a theory of the pure forms of wholes and parts

174

§14 The concept of Foundation and some relevant theorems
§21 Exact pinning down of the pregnant notions of Whole and
Part, and of their essential Species, by means of the notion of
Foundation
§23 Forms of categorial unity and wholes
§24 The pure formal types of wholes and parts. The postulate of
an a priori theory

174

INVESTIGATION IV
THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN INDEPENDENT
AND NON-INDEPENDENT MEANINGS AND THE
IDEA OF PURE GRAMMAR
Introduction
§1 Simple and complex meanings
§4 The question of the meaningfulness of ‘syncategorematic’
components of complex expressions

176
177
178

181
183
184
184

Contents

§5 Independent and non-independent meanings. The nonindependence of the sensory and expressive parts of words
§7 The conception of non-independent meanings as founded
contents
§8 Difﬁculties of this conception. (a) Whether the
non-independence of the meaning does not really only
lie in the non-independence of the object meant
§10 A priori laws governing combinations of meanings
§12 Nonsense and absurdity
§13 The laws of the compounding of meanings and the pure
logico-grammatical theory of forms

INVESTIGATION V
ON INTENTIONAL EXPERIENCES AND
THEIR ‘CONTENTS’
Introduction

xiii

186
187

189
189
192
193

197
199

CHAPTER ONE

Consciousness as the phenomenological subsistence of the ego and
consciousness as inner perception
§1 Varied ambiguity of the term ‘consciousness’
§2 First sense: Consciousness as the real phenomenological
unity of the ego’s experiences. The concept of an experience
§4 The relation between experiencing consciousness and
experienced content is no phenomenologically peculiar
type of relation
§5 Second sense. ‘Inner’ consciousness as inner perception
§6 Origin of the ﬁrst concept of consciousness out of the second
§8 The pure ego and awareness (‘Bewusstheit’)
Additional Note to the Second Edition

201
201
202

204
205
206
208
210

CHAPTER TWO

Consciousness as intentional experience
§9 The meaning of Brentano’s demarcation of ‘psychic
phenomena’
§10 Descriptive characterization of acts as ‘intentional’ experiences
§11 Avoidance of verbally tempting misunderstandings.
(a) The ‘mental’ or ‘immanent’ object
§12 (b) The act and the relation of consciousness or the ego to
the object
§13 The ﬁxing of our terminology

211
211
212
214
217
218

xiv Contents

§14 Difﬁculties which surround the assumption of acts as a
descriptively founded class of experiences
§15 Whether experiences of one and the same phenomenological
kind (of the genus Feeling in particular) can consist partly of
acts and partly of non-acts
(a) Are there any intentional feelings?
(b) Are there non-intentional feelings? Distinction between
feeling-sensations and feeling-acts
§16 Distinction between descriptive and intentional content
§17 The intentional content in the sense of the intentional object
§18 Simple and complex, founding and founded acts
§20 The difference between the quality and the matter of an act
§21 The intentional and the semantic essence
Appendix to §11 and §20. Critique of the ‘image-theory’
and of the doctrine of the ‘immanent’ objects of acts

219

223
224
226
229
230
232
233
236
238

CHAPTER THREE

The matter of the act and its underlying presentation
§22 The question of the relation between the matter and quality
of an act
§23 The view of ‘matter’ as a founding act of ‘mere presentation’
§27 The testimony of direct intuition. Perceptual presentation and
perception

242
242
243
245

CHAPTER FOUR

Study of founding presentations with special regard to the theory of
judgement

249

§32 An ambiguity in the word ‘presentation’, and the supposed
self-evidence of the principle that every act is founded on
an act of presentation

249

CHAPTER FIVE

Further contributions to the theory of judgement. ‘Presentation’ as a
qualitatively unitary genus of nominal and propositional acts
§37 The aim of the following investigation. The concept of an
objectifying act
§38 Qualitative and material differentiation of objectifying acts
§39 Presentation in the sense of an objectifying act, and its
qualitative modiﬁcation
§40 Continuation. Qualitative and imaginative modiﬁcation
§41 New interpretation of the principle that makes presentations
the basis of all acts. The objectifying act as the primary
bearer of ‘matter’

251
251
252
255
258

260

Contents xv
CHAPTER SIX

Summing-up of the most important ambiguities in the terms ‘presentation’
and ‘content’

261

§44 ‘Presentation’
§45 The ‘presentational content’
Note

261
265
265

Volume II, Part 2 of the Second
German Edition

267

Foreword to the Second Edition (1921)

267

INVESTIGATION VI
ELEMENTS OF A PHENOMENOLOGICAL
ELUCIDATION OF KNOWLEDGE
Introduction

First Section
Objectifying intentions and their fulfilments:
knowledge as a synthesis of fulfilment and its
gradations

271
273

279

CHAPTER ONE

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulﬁlment
§1 Whether every type of mental act, or only certain types, can
function as carriers of meaning
§2 That all acts may be expressed does not decide the issue.
There are two senses to talk about expressing an act
§3 A third sense of talk about the ‘expression’ of acts.
Formulation of our theme
§4 The expression of a percept (‘judgement of perception’). Its
meaning cannot lie in perception, but must lie in peculiar
expressive acts
§5 Continuation. Perception as an act which determines
meaning, without embodying it
Addendum
§6 The static unity of expressive thought and expressed
intuition. Recognition (das Erkennen)

281
281
282
283

285
286
289
291

xvi Contents

§7 Recognition as a character of acts, and the ‘generality of words’
§8 The dynamic unity of expression and expressed intuition.
The consciousness of fulﬁlment and that of identity
Addendum
§10 The wider class of experiences of fulﬁlment. Intuitions as
intentions which require fulﬁlment
§11 Frustration and conﬂict. The synthesis of distinction

292
296
298
299
300

CHAPTER TWO

Indirect characterization of objectifying intentions and their essential
varieties through differences in the syntheses of fulﬁlment
§13 The synthesis of knowing (recognition) as the characteristic
form of fulﬁlment for objectifying acts. Subsumption of
acts of meaning under the class of objectifying acts
§14 Phenomenological characterization of the distinction between
signitive and intuitive intentions through peculiarities of
fulﬁlment. (a) Sign, image and self-presentation
(b) The perceptual and imaginative adumbration of the
object
§15 Signitive intentions beyond the limits of the
meaning-function

302

302

304
306
308

CHAPTER THREE

The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge

312

§16 Simple identiﬁcation and fulﬁlment
§17 The question of the relation between fulﬁlment and intuitive
illustration
§22 Fullness and ‘intuitive substance’ (Gehalt)
§23 Relationships of weight between the intuitive and signitive
‘substance’ (Gehalt) of one and the same act. Pure intuition
and pure signiﬁcation. Perceptual and imaginal content,
pure perception and pure imagination. Gradations of
fulness
§25 Fullness and intentional matter
§26 Continuation. Representation or interpretation (Auffassung).
Matter as the interpretative sense, the interpretative form and
the interpreted content. Differentiating characterization of
intuitive and signitive interpretation
§29 Complete and defective intuitions. Adequate and objectively
complete intuitive illustrations. Essentia (Essenz)

312
314
315

316
319

322
324

Contents

xvii

CHAPTER FIVE

The ideal of adequation. Self-evidence and truth

327

§36 Introduction
§37 The fulﬁlling function of perception. The ideal of ultimate
fulﬁlment
§38 Positing acts in the function of fulﬁlment. Self-evidence in the
loose and strict sense
§39 Self-evidence and truth

327

Second Section
Sense and understanding

327
330
331

337

CHAPTER SIX

Sensuous and categorial intuitions
§40 The problem of the fulﬁlment of categorial meaning-forms,
with a thought leading towards its solution
§41 Continuation. Extension of our sphere of examples
§42 The distinction between sensuous stuff and categorial form
throughout the whole realm of objectifying acts
§43 The objective correlates of categorial forms are not ‘real’
(realen) moments
§44 The origin of the concept of Being and of the remaining
categories does not lie in the realm of inner perception
§45 Widening of the concept of Intuition, and in particular of the
concepts Perception and Imagination. Sensible and categorial
intuition
§46 Phenomenological analysis of the distinction between sensuous
and categorial perception
§47 Continuation. Characterization of sense-perception as
‘straightforward’ perception
§48 Characterization of categorial acts as founded acts
§52 Universal objects constituting themselves in universal intuitions

339
339
342
343
345
346

348
349
351
354
357

CHAPTER SEVEN

A study in categorial representation

360

§53 Backward reference to the researches of our ﬁrst section

360

CHAPTER EIGHT

The a priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking

362

§59 The complication into ever new forms. The pure theory of the
forms of possible intuitions

362

xviii Contents

§60 The relative or functional difference between matter and form.
Pure acts of understanding, and those mixed with sense.
Sensuous concepts and categories
§61 Categorial forming involves no real reshaping of the object
§62 Our freedom in the categorial forming of given material and
its limits. Purely categorial laws (laws of ‘authentic’ thinking)
§63 The new laws of the validity of signitive and admixedly
signitive acts (laws of inauthentic thinking)
§64 The pure logico-grammatical laws are laws for any
understanding whatever, and not merely for any human
understanding. Their psychological meaning and normative
function in relation to inadequate thought
§65 The senseless problem of the real meaning of the logical
§66 Distinction between the most important differences mixed up
in the current opposition of ‘intuiting’ and ‘thinking’
Additional note to the Second Edition

Third Section
Clarification of our introductory problem

363
364
365
368

371
373
374
376

377

CHAPTER NINE

Non-objectifying acts as apparent fulﬁlments of meaning

379

§67 That not every act of meaning includes an act of knowing
§68 The controversy regarding the interpretation of the peculiar
grammatical forms which express non-objectifying acts
§69 Arguments for and against the Aristotelian conception
§70 Decision

379
381
383
388

APPENDIX

External and internal perception: physical and psychical phenomena
§1 The popular and the traditional philosophical concepts of
external and internal perception
§2 and 3 Epistemological and psychological motives for deepening
the traditional division: Brentano’s conception
§4 Criticism. External and internal perception are, on a normal
interpretation of the concepts, of the same epistemological
character: Perception and Apperception
§5 The equivocations of the term ‘appearance’
§5a Excised passage from the First Edition
§6 There is for this reason confusion between the epistemologically
meaningless opposition of inner and outer perception, and the

391
391
392

396
397
400

Contents

epistemologically fundamental opposition of adequate and
inadequate perception
§7 That the dispute is not verbal
§8 Confusion of two fundamentally different divisions of
‘phenomena’. That ‘physical’ contents do not exist ‘in merely
phenomenal fashion’, but exist ‘actually’
Notes
Index

xix

400
402

403
405
417

HH

Preface

Edmond Husserl’s Logical Investigations, little known to English-speaking
students of philosophy but well known to most students of the subject with
a different mother tongue, is a work of the ﬁrst importance in the history of
philosophy. It was written at a turning point in Husserl’s philosophical
development, between his earlier book, Philosophy of Arithmetic (1891),
deeply embedded in the psychologism so prevalent in German philosophy of
the time, and the Ideas towards a pure Phenomenology and phenomenological
Philosophy (1913) in which the notion of noema was ﬁrst presented and the
programme of phenomenology was ﬁrst set out. In Philosophy of Arithmetic
Husserl had criticised Gottlob Frege’s Foundations of Arithmetic from a
psychologistic standpoint. Psychologism attempts to explain concepts by
reference to the inner mental operations supposedly involved in attaining
them or grasping them; Frege had engaged in denouncing this methodology
– the intrusion of psychological considerations into logic and the analysis
of meaning – from the Foundations of Arithmetic onwards. Husserl, whose
previous relations with Frege had been fairly cordial, was deeply affronted
by his savage, and in certain respects unfair, review in 1894 of the Philosophy
of Arithmetic, and had no further contact with him for the next twelve years.
Frege’s review was his most sustained attack on psychologism; and although
it was resented by Husserl for its unkindness, it is widely believed to have
inﬂuenced him profoundly, albeit some reject this conjecture. However this
may be, Husserl had completely changed his attitude to psychologism by 1900.
His arguments against it in the Prolegomena often coincided with those used
by Frege, although he elaborated them in far more detail. Yet while Frege’s
objections to psychologism had made little impact, that of Husserl’s assault
on it was overwhelming: the Prolegomena came close to killing off the inﬂuence of psychologism within German philosophy, although Husserl’s old
teacher Brentano remained bewildered by this turn of events.
Attention to Husserl’s famous book may help to correct the impression
of ‘German philosophy’ often given by those who declare their enthusiasm
for what they describe as the German tradition in the subject. This they see
as originating in the work of Hegel and the idealist school generally and

xxii

Preface

descending to Heidegger. Heidegger indeed began as a pupil of Husserl’s,
though he diverged from him so markedly; but the false impression of what
the German philosophical tradition has been may be corrected by reading
Husserl’s disparaging remarks about Hegel, and the accompanying encomium of Bolzano, in the Appendix to Chapter 10 of the Prolegomena.
Frege did not see himself as the founder of a school, although he was
highly conscious of his divergence from the approaches of other philosophers
contemporary with him. Yet nowadays he is recognised by all analytical
philosophers as the grandfather of their school of philosophy – with Bolzano,
whom Husserl so greatly admired, as its great-grandfather. Husserl, on the
other hand, set out to be the inaugurator of a new philosophical method;
and no one could deny him the title of founder of phenomenology. They
were thus progenitors of two philosophical schools that have diverged
so widely from one another that communication between them has until
recently been almost impossible. Yet, at the time when Husserl’s Logical
Investigations were published, no one who knew the work of both men
would have thought of them as belonging to radically different schools of
philosophy; they had somewhat different interests, and a markedly different
literary style, but they did not then appear any great distance apart in
philosophical outlook. The moment of the publication of the Logical Investigations was that at which the views of the founders of the rival philosophical
schools approximated most closely to one another.
They even had quite similar opinions about the nature of logic. Husserl
denied that logic is an essentially normative discipline; he held that any
normative discipline must rest on a theoretical science. Frege is often described
as having held that logic is essentially normative in character, and he did
indeed say as much in one of his unpublished writings. He did so because,
when commenting on its description as embodying the ‘laws of thought’, he
repeatedly observed that it did not lay down laws governing the way we
do think, but promulgated laws concerning how we ought to think. In
fact, however, his view was essentially the same as Husserl’s. He frequently
described logic as concerned with the laws of truth; and in the Introduction
to his Basic Laws of Arithmetic he says that these are laws about what is,
independently of our judgements.
Any analytical philosopher interested in how philosophy arrived at its
present state thus needs to study the Logical Investigations to discover how
the philosophical traditions that stemmed from the work of these two innovators came to diverge so widely: one investigating intuitions of essences,
the other analysing language (to which Frege himself had so ambivalent an
attitude). Recent work within the analytical tradition, from the late Gareth
Evans onwards, has tended to reverse the explanatory priority which that
tradition has historically given to language over thought. This suggests the
possibility of a rapprochement; at the same time it may seem to threaten a
relapse into psychologism. That such a relapse has not occurred is due to

Preface

xxiii

the treatment of the structure of thoughts by adherents of this new tendency
after the model of a Fregean semantic analysis of language. Do we have
here a means of reconciling the two traditions? Or does the gulf between
them remain to be bridged?
Michael Dummett
Oxford, April 2000

HH

Introduction

The Shorter Logical Investigations
The Shorter Logical Investigations is a selection of the key sections of Edmund
Husserl’s two-volume Logical Investigations, intended to complement the
longer work, now available in a paperback edition for the ﬁrst time. The
current revival of interest in Husserl both in connection with the project to
discover the origins of analytic philosophy and also in order to understand
the origins of the century-old movement known as phenomenology has drawn
attention to the Investigations. The aim of this abridged edition is to provide
an accessible introduction for professional philosophers, students and general readers alike, to a work which, although recognised as the most important foundational text of the whole phenomenological movement and as a
rich source of original ideas in the philosophy of logic and in semantics, has
a not undeserved reputation as a difﬁcult, dense, impenetrable and confusing text. In fact, Husserl intended his Investigations to be an exhibition of
his own thinking in progress, as he wrestled with difﬁcult issues concerning
logic, meaning and truth, and was always conscious that the work lacked
both form and literary grace. He made several efforts to edit the book to
accommodate his developing views, and even planned to replace it with
something written more deliberately as an introductory text. As a result the
Logical Investigations was progressively eclipsed by the appearance of Ideas
I, the Cartesian Meditations and by the Crisis of European Sciences, as a
basic introduction to Husserl’s thought. Yet, Husserl always regarded the
Investigations as his ‘breakthrough work’ and indeed his later positions are
almost unintelligible unless understood in relation to his original formulations in the Investigations. A more compact, user-friendly version of the
text, then, has long been needed. I hope this Shorter Logical Investigations
will answer this need, and provide a convenient entry to Husserl’s thought.
In the long run, I can hope no better than that it will also serve as a stimulus
to read the Investigations in the full form.
In selecting the texts, I have had to face difﬁcult choices as Husserl’s
mode of writing (like Aristotle’s) involves the complex dissection of prob-

xxvi Introduction

lems, the consideration of the prevailing views, and then the presentation of
his own position, almost as a set of asides within the exposition of the
problem at hand. Nevertheless, I have attempted, within the conﬁnes of the
space available, to provide as comprehensive and representative selection as
could be made, while still preserving the overall structure of the work. In
selecting passages, I have attempted to preserve the integrity of the individual sections Husserl himself marked out, in order not to interfere with
Husserl’s reasoning. I have also sought advice from Husserl scholars (my
thanks to David Carr, Kevin Mulligan, Harry Reeder, Donn Welton, among
many others) as to the essential passages to include. For the fuller picture,
readers are urged to consult the reprint of Findlay’s translation of the whole
two-volume Investigations.

The Logical Investigations (1900/1901)
Edmund Husserl (1859–1938) published his Logische Untersuchungen
(Logical Investigations) in two volumes in 1900 and 1901.1 The ﬁrst volume,
Prolegomena zur reinen Logik (Prolegomena to Pure Logic) appeared from
the publisher Max Niemeyer in July 1900.2 The second volume, subtitled
Untersuchungen zur Phänomenologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis (‘Investigations in Phenomenology and the Theory of Knowledge’), containing six
long treatises or ‘Investigations’, appeared in two parts in 1901. This gargantuan work – which Husserl insisted was not a ‘systematic exposition of
logic’ (eine systematische Darstellung der Logik, LI III, Findlay II: 3; Hua
XIX/1: 228),3 but an effort at epistemological clariﬁcation and critique of
the basic concepts of logical knowledge – consisted of a series of analytical
inquiries (analytische Untersuchungen) into fundamental issues in epistemology and the philosophy of logic, and also extensive, intricate philosophical
discussions of issues in semiotics, semantics, mereology (the study of wholes
and parts), formal grammar (the a priori study of the parts of any language
whatsoever in regard to their coherent combination into meaningful unities),
and the nature of conscious acts, especially presentations and judgements.
In fact it was these latter detailed descriptive psychological analyses of the
essential structures of consciousness, in terms of intentional acts, their contents, objects and truth-grasping character, especially in the last two Investigations, which set the agenda for the emerging discipline Husserl fostered
under the name phenomenology.
The Prolegomena4 appeared as a free-standing treatise dedicated to securing the true meaning of logic as a pure, a priori, science of ideal meanings
and of the formal laws regulating them, entirely distinct from all psychological acts, contents and procedures. The Prolegomena offered the strongest possible refutation to the then dominant psychologistic interpretation of
logic, propounded by John Stuart Mill and others, which Husserl viewed as
leading to a sceptical relativism that threatened the very possibility of objec-

Introduction xxvii

tive knowledge. Turning instead to an older tradition of logic stemming
from Leibniz, Kant, Bolzano and Lotze, Husserl defends a vision of logic as
a pure theory of science – in fact, the ‘science of science’, in the course of
which he carefully elaborates the different senses in which this pure logic
can be transformed into a normative science or developed into a practical
discipline or ‘technology’ (Kunstlehre).
The second volume of the Investigations (1901) was published in two
parts: Part One contained the ﬁrst Five Investigations and Part Two the
long and dense Sixth Investigation, the writing of which had considerably
delayed the appearance of the work as Husserl began to realise the depth of
the phenomenological project he had uncovered. Whereas the Prolegomena
was particularly inﬂuential in turning the tide against psychologism (Frege’s
efforts in the same direction being in relative obscurity at the time), it
was the second volume of the Investigations in particular that had a major
impact on philosophers interested in concrete analyses of problems of consciousness and meaning, leading to the development of phenomenology.
Phenomenology, in line with a general turn away from idealism then
current, was to be a science of ‘concrete’ issues. According to Husserl’s
Introduction, phenomenology aimed to avoid speculative constructions in
philosophy (exempliﬁed, in his view, by Hegel). The Investigations impressed
its early readers as exemplifying a radically new way of doing philosophy,
focusing directly on analysis of the things themselves – the matters at issue
(die Sachen selbst) – without the usual detour through the history of philosophy, ‘merely criticising traditional philosophemes’ as Husserl put it (LI VI,
Intro., Findlay II: 187; Hua XIX/2: 543), or making partisan declarations in
favour of some philosophical system (such as empiricism, positivism, rationalism, Hegelianism or Neo-Kantianism).
Within a decade, as Husserl’s ground-breaking efforts came to be recognised, the Investigations had established itself as the foundational text of the
nascent ‘phenomenological movement’ (a term Husserl himself regularly
invoked) in Germany. The Investigations’ inﬂuence subsequently spread
throughout Europe, from Russia and Poland to France and Spain, such
that eventually, it is no exaggeration to say that this work took on a status
in twentieth-century European philosophy analogous to that of another
foundational text – this time in psychoanalysis – Die Traumdeutung (Interpretation of Dreams),5 published by Husserl’s contemporary Sigmund Freud
(1856–1939) in 1899. The Investigations continues to be a necessary startingpoint for anyone wanting to understand the development of European
philosophy in the twentieth century, from Heidegger and Frege to Levinas,
Gadamer, Sartre or Derrida.
Given that the Logical Investigations is such a pivotal text in twentiethcentury philosophy, it remains something of a neglected masterpiece, remarkably little read, and where read, poorly understood. For some seventy
years it remained untranslated into English. An American philosopher living

xxviii Introduction

in Europe, William B. Pitkin sought Husserl’s permission to translate it into
English in 1905, but he abandoned the effort when he could not get a publisher
(see Hua XVIII: xxxvii; XIX/1: xxii). Seemingly, the philosopher William
James, who was consulted on the project, advised the publisher not to proceed – suggesting that the last thing the world needed was another German
textbook on logic, and so the project was abandoned, which grieved Husserl
because he had been an admirer of James.6 Marvin Farber, an American
student of Husserl’s, published a paraphrase of the Investigations in 1943,7
but it was not until 1970 that John N. Findlay produced the ﬁrst and only
complete English translation of the Second Edition. With the hundredth
anniversary of the Investigations’ publication now upon us, it is important
to make Findlay’s translation available once again in an accessible form for
the English-speaking reader.

The emergence of phenomenology
In the ﬁrst edition of 1901, Husserl adopted the existing term ‘phenomenology’
(Phänomenologie) – a term already in currency since Lambert, Kant and Hegel,
but given new vigour by Brentano and his students – in a somewhat less
than fully systematic way to characterise his new approach to the conditions
of the possibility of knowledge in general. Husserl wrote in his Introduction:
Pure phenomenology represents a ﬁeld of neutral researches, in which
several sciences have their roots. It is, on the one hand, an ancillary to
psychology conceived as an empirical science. Proceeding in purely intuitive fashion, it analyses and describes in their essential generality
– in the speciﬁc guise of a phenomenology of thought and knowledge –
the experiences of presentation, judgement and knowledge, experiences
which, treated as classes of real events in the natural context of zoological reality, receive a scientiﬁc probing at the hands of empirical
psychology. Phenomenology, on the other hand, lays bare the ‘sources’
from which the basic concepts and ideal laws of pure logic ‘ﬂow’, and
back to which they must once more be traced, so as to give them all the
‘clearness and distinctness’ needed for an understanding, and for an
epistemological critique, of pure logic.
(LI, Findlay I: 166; Hua XIX/1: 6–7)
The logician is not interested in mental acts as such, but only in objective
meanings and their formal regulation, the phenomenologist on the other
hand is concerned with the essential structures of cognition and their essential correlation to the things known. When Husserl says in this Introduction, ‘we must go back to the things themselves’ (Wir wollen auf die ‘Sachen
selbst’ zurückgehen, LI, Findlay I: 168; Hua XIX/1: 10), he means particu-

Introduction xxix

larly that the task of phenomenology is to clarify the nature of logical
concepts by tracing their origins in intuition:
Our great task is now to bring the Ideas of logic, the logical concepts and
laws (die logischen Ideen, Begriffe und Gesetze), to epistemological clarity and deﬁniteness. Here phenomenological analysis must begin.
(LI, Findlay I: 168; Hua XIX/1: 9)
More broadly, Husserl wants to document all matters that present themselves to consciousness in their diverse modes of intuitive givenness (and not
restricting the sources of intuition arbitrarily in advance, as empiricism
and other theories traditionally had done). Husserl initially characterised
phenomenology ambiguously as either a parallel discipline to epistemology,
or as a more radical grounding of epistemology, that sought to clarify the
essences of acts of cognition in their most general sense. In analysing knowledge, Husserl wanted to do justice both to the necessary ideality (that is:
self-identity and independence of space and time) of the truths known in
cognition, and at the same time properly recognise the essential contribution
of the knowing acts of the subject. Thus, looking back in 1925, Husserl
described the aim of the Logical Investigations as follows:
In the year 1900–01 appeared my Logical Investigations which were the
results of my ten year long efforts to clarify the Idea of pure Logic
by going back to the sense-bestowing or cognitive achievements being
effected in the complex of lived experiences of logical thinking.8
Husserl’s overall aim is to lay down what he describes as the ‘phenomenological founding of logic’ (die phänomenologische Fundierung der Logik, LI,
Findlay I: 175; Hua XIX/1: 22), a clariﬁcation of the essential nature of
logical knowledge as a preliminary to systematic formal logic and to science
in general.9 More narrowly, his ‘phenomenology of the logical experiences’
(Phänomenologie der logischen Erlebnisse, LI, Findlay I: 168; Hua XIX/1:
10) aims to give descriptive understanding of the mental states and their
‘indwelling senses’ (ihren einwohnenden Sinnes), with the aim of ﬁxing the
meanings of key logical concepts and operations, through elaborate and
careful distinctions and clariﬁcations. ‘Phenomenology’, in the First Edition,
then, meant the efforts to inquire, radically and consistently, back from the
categories of objectivities to the subjective acts, act-structures, experiential
foundations in which the objectivities of the appropriate sorts come to be
objects of consciousness and to evident self-givenness, working in the domain
of pure intuition, rather than being a theoretical or hypothetical construction in the manner of naturalistic psychology. As Husserl put it in 1925, this
‘regressive inquiry’ brings a new world to light.10 This is the domain of the
correlation between objectivity and subjectivity.

xxx Introduction

In particular, Husserl wants carefully to analyse the intentional subject
matter of expressive experiences (ausdrückliche Erlebnisse) where ‘expression’ is understood as the articulating of meaning. His focus then is on the
ideal sense of the objective intention (ihr intentionaler Gehalt, der ideale Sinn
ihrer gegenständlichen Intention, LI, Findlay I: 174; Hua XIX/1: 21). In
giving an account of the idea of meaning or expression, Husserl takes
concepts apart and elaborates extensively on their many meanings before
moving on to discuss other related concepts. Thus, for example, he carefully distinguishes the number of different senses of the term ‘presentation’
(Vorstellung), separating out its various psychological, logical and epistemological meanings. Likewise, he embarks on conceptual analyses of key concepts such as ‘content’, ‘judgement’ and ‘consciousness’. Thus he recognises
the need to sort out the many meanings of the term ‘content’ (Inhalt, sometimes Gehalt), a term particularly frequently invoked by logicians and psychologists of the day. In particular, the contrast between what Husserl terms
in the First Edition real (reell ) and ideal content, and later what he refers to
as the distinction between phenomenological and intentional content (LI V
§16). A typical example of the clariﬁcation Husserl is seeking is his differentiation in Sixth Investigation (§§30–5) of the kinds of unity and conﬂict of
meaning contents that lay the basis for the logical laws of consistency and
contradiction. It is these rigorous feats of analysis that won the admiration
of early readers and, more recently, of analytic philosophers.
While Husserl’s own ‘concrete’ analyses were initially focused primarily
on the foundations of arithmetic and logic, and the structures of knowledge,
gradually he and his followers broadened phenomenology to address the a
priori structures of consciousness in general, including affective, volitional,
practical, evaluative, aesthetic, religious, legal, political and other forms of
conscious awareness of meaning grasping and meaning articulating. Phenomenology was to be a science of essences and as such it was a pure, a priori
discipline, attending to the nature of things as given in ‘essential seeing’
(Wesensschau). Phenomenology would broaden the sources of intuition
further than previous philosophies had allowed, and clarify the fundamental
relation of thought to truth.
Quite early on, the Investigations attracted the attention of students of
the Munich philosopher and psychologist Theodor Lipps (1851–1914), who
himself had been criticised for psychologism in the Prolegomena and who, in
consequence, altered his views to come largely into agreement with Husserl.
Through Lipps’s students, especially Johannes Daubert (1877–1947), the
Logical Investigations became the leading philosophical text for a generation
of German philosophers, including Alexander Pfänder (1870–1941), whose
prize-winning, Habilitation thesis, written under Lipps at Munich, Phenomenology of Willing. A Psychological Analysis (Phänomenologie des Wollens.
Eine psychologische Analyse, 1900), contained the word ‘phenomenology’ in
the title, although the term does not occur elsewhere in the work.11 Subse-

Introduction xxxi

quently, Max Scheler (1874–1928), Adolf Reinach (1883–1917), Edith Stein
(1891–1942) and Roman Ingarden (1893–1970) were all drawn to this early
conception of phenomenology with its strongly realist orientation and its
promise of resolving philosophy’s hitherto intractable disputes.

The role of the Investigations in Husserl’s
development
Husserl himself regarded his Logical Investigations as a ‘ “break-through”,
not an end but rather a beginning’ (ein Werk des Durchbruchs, und somit nicht
ein Ende, sondern ein Anfang, LI Findlay I, 3; Hua XVIII: 8).12 In it, Husserl
abandoned his earlier approaches to logic and mathematics expressed in
his ﬁrst book, Philosophie der Arithmetik (Philosophy of Arithmetic, 1891),13
which had been judged psychologist by its chief critic, Gottlob Frege (1848–
1925). Husserl discovered a much more fruitful way of doing philosophy
in a rigorously scientiﬁc way through the clariﬁcation of the essences of
our fundamental cognitive achievements, eventually leading to his later
transformation of phenomenology into a comprehensive transcendental
philosophical outlook. Ever a restless innovator, he constantly reinterpreted
the signiﬁcance of his own contribution, and thus the Investigations played a
singular role in his own philosophical development. Both in his lecture courses
and in his private research manuscripts, he constantly reworked the ground
covered in the Logical Investigations, for example, in his Göttingen lectures
on logic (1906–7), on meaning (1907–8), on logic (1910–11), in his Freiburg
lectures on logic and in Phenomenological Psychology (1925), in the lectures
that eventually evolved into Formal and Transcendental Logic (1929), and
even in his Crisis of European Sciences (1936) and the posthumously published Experience and Judgement (1938). Husserl’s own ‘breakthrough’ seemed
so surprising even to himself that it had to be constantly rethought.
In later years, Husserl sought to distance himself from the common understanding of the work as solely an exercise in the philosophy of logic. He
complained that he was being characterised rather limitedly as a logician,
whereas he saw himself more broadly as a theorist of science in general, and
as the founder of a new foundational science, ﬁrst philosophy or phenomenology, which aimed at the careful description of all forms of making meaning
and registering meaningfulness and hence the whole domain of subjectivity.
He even claimed (in a letter to E. Spranger, 1918, quoted in Hua XVIII: xiii)
that phenomenology had ‘as little to do with logic as with ethics, aesthetics,
and other parallel disciplines’. In other words, Husserl would later suggest
that it was simply an accident of personal biography that he happened to
come to phenomenology through logical researches; he could just as easily
have entered the ﬁeld from another direction entirely. In a letter to Georg
Misch of 16 November 1930, Husserl said that he lost interest in formal logic
and real ontology when he made his breakthrough to the transcendental,

xxxii Introduction

and later concentrated on founding a theory of transcendental subjectivity
and intersubjectivity.14 Before analysing the Investigations in more detail, let
us now turn, then, to a brief consideration of the author, Edmund Husserl.

Edmund Husserl (1859–1938): life and writings
Edmund Husserl was born in Prossnitz, Moravia (now Prostejov, Czech
Republic), on 8 April 1859. He studied mathematics and physics at the
universities of Leipzig and Berlin, where he was deeply inﬂuenced by the
mathematician Carl Weierstrass (1815–97), before moving to the University
of Vienna, where he completed his doctorate in mathematics in 1882. Following a brief period as Weierstrass’ assistant and a term in the army, Husserl
went back to Vienna to study philosophy with Franz Brentano from 1884 to
1886. On Brentano’s recommendation, Husserl then went to the university
of Halle to study with Brentano’s most senior student, Carl Stumpf (1848–
1936), completing his Habilitation thesis, On the Concept of Number. Psychological Analyses with him in 1887.15 Husserl remained in Halle as a lowly,
unsalaried Privatdozent from 1887 until 1901, the unhappiest years of his
life, as he later confessed.
Although Husserl wrote research notes and manuscripts continuously and
obsessively, he published few books during his lifetime.16 His ﬁrst publication at Halle came in 1891 with the Philosophy of Arithmetic, whose opening
chapters contained a revised version of his Habilitation thesis. The Logical
Investigations took another ten years of difﬁcult labour to write, during
which Husserl sacriﬁced many of the routines of family life. Husserl always
regarded its results as provisional. Nevertheless, writing the book ‘cured’
him, as he later said to Dorion Cairns. Its publication facilitated a move
from Halle to a new salaried position at the university of Göttingen, a
renowned centre of mathematics under David Hilbert (1862–1943). It was
during his years at Göttingen that he began to attract both German and
international students to pursue the practice and theory of phenomenology.
However, Husserl still managed only two publications between 1901 and
1916: an important long essay, Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft (‘Philosophy as a Rigorous Science’), commissioned by Heinrich Rickert for his
new journal Logos in 1910/1911,17 in which Husserl outlined his opposition
to all forms of naturalism and historicism (as he understood Dilthey’s
Weltanschauungsphilosophie to be); and a major book, Ideas Pertaining to
a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy18 (hereafter
Ideas I), published in 1913, which offered an entirely new way of entering
into phenomenology.
To the great shock of Husserl’s earlier realist followers (such as Ingarden
and Pfänder), Ideas I quite deliberately espoused a form of transcendental
idealism (involving a radicalisation of the projects of Kant and Descartes),
an outlook Husserl would continue to maintain and develop throughout his

Introduction xxxiii

career. Husserl himself, however, insisted that he really had this orientation
in mind when he was developing phenomenology in the Investigations. In his
Introduction to Ideas I, he said that readers of the Logical Investigations
had misunderstood the work as an exercise in a kind of immanent psychology,
whereas he had always intended a purer and more essential phenomenological
approach:
In supposed agreement with the Logische Untersuchungen, phenomenology has been conceived as a substratum of empirical psychology,
as a sphere comprising ‘immanental’ descriptions of psychical mental
processes, a sphere comprising descriptions that – so the immanence
in question is understood – are strictly conﬁned within the bounds of
internal experience. It would seem that my protest against this conception has been of little avail . . .
(Ideas I: xviii; Hua III/1: 2)
In other words, Husserl would later claim that transcendental phenomenology as a science of pure essential possibilities was entirely distinct from
psychology in all its forms, including descriptive psychology (which he now
treats as a branch of empirical psychology).
In 1916, Husserl was appointed to the chair of philosophy at the University of Freiburg, which he held until his retirement in 1928. Here, as he
recorded in his 1920 Foreword to the revision of the Sixth Investigation (LI,
Findlay 1970: 661; Hua XIX/2: 533), he became deeply immersed in teaching and research, pursuing the ideal of a system of philosophy with phenomenology at its core, and published almost nothing, apart from an article on
the renewal of philosophy in a Japanese journal Kaizo, a little article on
Buddha, and a truncated version of his lectures on time, On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time (1928), edited by his successor
to the Freiburg Chair, Martin Heidegger, more or less as a counterpoint to
the latter’s own Being and Time (1927).19 During the last decade of his life,
however, Husserl was extremely active, giving lectures in Germany, Holland
and France, and publishing Formal and Transcendental Logic in 1929,20 and
the French version of his Paris lectures, Méditations cartésiennes, in 1931,
translated by Gabrielle Peiffer and Emmanuel Levinas.21 In part, Husserl’s
intense activity was spurred by his desire to offer a corrective to Heidegger’s
version of phenomenological ontology, which Husserl felt distorted and
betrayed his own mission for a transcendental phenomenology.
Following the coming to power of the National Socialists in January
1933, Husserl and his family suffered under the increasingly severe antiSemitic laws enacted in Germany, which led to the suspension of his emeritus rights and eventually (in 1935) to the withdrawal of German citizenship.
While he continued to live in Freiburg, he was shunned by most of his
former colleagues, apart from his assistant Eugen Fink (1905–75) and former
student Ludwig Landgrebe (by then a professor in Prague). However, he set

xxxiv Introduction

about the task of preparing his extensive research manuscripts for publication. Despite meeting with ofﬁcial opposition, Husserl continued to write
with new vigour against the crisis of the age, producing work of astonishing
scope and originality, e.g., the Crisis of European Sciences, developed in
lectures in Vienna and Prague and published in Belgrade in 1936 (publication in Germany being denied him).22 After a period of illness, Husserl died
in Freiburg in 1938. His last work, Erfahrung und Urteil (Experience and
Judgement) appeared posthumously, with the extensive editorial involvement of Ludwig Landgrebe, in 1938.23
Through the intervention of a young Belgian philosophy graduate and
priest, Fr Hermann Van Breda (1911–74), much of Husserl’s Nachlass, including lecture notes and research manuscripts, amounting to some 45,000
pages of hand-written material, composed in an obsolete German shorthand, the Gabelsberger system, was smuggled out of Nazi Germany and is
now preserved in manuscript form in the Husserl Archives in Leuven, Belgium. Here, in cooperation with the sister archives in Cologne and Freiburg,
researchers are carefully editing these manuscripts for publication in the
Husserliana Gesammelte Werke series of which more than 30 volumes have
already appeared, with more scheduled.

The genesis of the Logical Investigations
On his own admission, the origin of Husserl’s Logical Investigations lay in the
studies in mathematics, logic and psychology, he had been pursuing, inspired
by his teachers Weierstrass, Brentano and Stumpf. As he put it, the Investigations originally grew out of his desire to achieve ‘a philosophical clariﬁcation (eine philosophische Klärung) of pure mathematics’ (Findlay I: 1; Hua
XVIII: 5). It worried Husserl that mathematicians could produce good results and yet employ diverse and even conﬂicting theories about the nature
of numbers and other mathematical operations. Their intuitive procedures
needed philosophical grounding. In search of this grounding for mathematics,
Husserl was led to consider formal systems generally, and ultimately to a
review of the whole nature of meaningful thought, its connection with linguistic assertion, and its achievement of truth in genuinely evident cognitions.
Husserl suggested that the Logical Investigations was originally inspired
by Brentano’s attempts to reform traditional logic. As he put it in his
‘Phenomenological Psychology’ lectures of 1925:
. . . the Logical Investigations are fully inﬂuenced by Brentano’s suggestions, as should be readily understandable in view of the fact that I was
a direct pupil of Brentano.24
In lecture courses Husserl had attended, Brentano had proposed a reform of
traditional Aristotelian syllogistic logic, restricting the range of signiﬁcant

Introduction

xxxv

logical forms, effectively reducing all forms of quantiﬁcation to existential
quantiﬁcation, reformulating the structure of logical judgements and recasting sentences in new ways to highlight the underlying logical structure distinct from the grammatical form. Despite its promise, Husserl recognised
that Brentano’s project was destined to fail, since it lacked a proper clariﬁcation of the nature of meaning in general. Only a complete clariﬁcation of
the ‘essential phenomenological relations between expression and meaning,
or between meaning-intention and meaning-fulﬁlment’ (Findlay I: 173; Hua
XIX/1: 19) could steer the proper course between grammatical analysis and
meaning analysis (Bedeutungsanalyse), Husserl claimed.
Brentano’s failed reform of logic alerted Husserl’s attention to serious deﬁciencies in current accounts of the nature of logic, in J. S. Mill, C. Sigwart,
W. Hamilton, B. Erdmann, T. Lipps, and others. Husserl’s familiarity with
– and deep critique of – the logical and mathematical developments of the
nineteenth century are evident in his several critical reviews of logical literature, published in 1894, 1897, 1903 and 1904.25 While he fully recognised
the importance of logic understood as a calculus of classes being developed
by George Boole (1815–64) and by his German contemporary, Ernst
Schröder, and the attempts to interpret logical deduction as a mechanical
process made by William Stanley Jevons (1835–82) and others, including
Gottlob Frege, Husserl harboured worries about the limitations of formal
mathematical logic, which he saw as a reﬁnement of logical technique
rather than as a genuine philosophy of logic.26 In particular, Husserl saw
a calculus purely as a formal device for mechanically transposing signs
(or replacing them with equivalents) according to rules, and thus essentially
different from proper logical deduction. Technical brilliance in mathematical logic still required critical theoretical insight in order to elevate it to
science.
For a more positive view of logic, Husserl revived ‘pure logic’, a conception deriving from Leibniz and Kant, but expressed most clearly in the
Wissenschaftslehre of the neglected Austrian logician Bernard Bolzano (1781–
1848),27 and his followers (especially Frege’s teacher Rudolf Hermann Lotze,
1817–81), which saw logic as a purely formal ‘science of science’. Husserl
singled out Bolzano in particular as one of the greatest logicians and even as
the unacknowledged forefather of modern mathematical logic:
Logic as a science must . . . be built upon Bolzano’s work, and must
learn from him its need for mathematical acuteness in distinctions, for
mathematical exactness in theories. It will then reach a new standpoint
for judging the mathematicizing theories of logic, which mathematicians, quite unperturbed by philosophic scorn, are so successfully constructing. These theories altogether conform to the spirit of Bolzano’s
logic, though Bolzano had no inkling of them.
(LI, Prol. §61; Findlay I: 143; Hua XVIII: 228)

xxxvi Introduction

Husserl would also credit Hermann Lotze with opening his eyes to the true
nature of the ideal objectivities which logic studied, helping him to understand the domain of the ideal while avoiding Platonic hypostasization.
Of course, as Husserl set out to write the Logical Investigations many
other philosophical issues pressed on him, leading him considerably beyond
what might be considered to belong strictly to the task of laying the foundations of logic and into broader questions of epistemology, semantics and
even ontology. Husserl was drawn to inquire into the conditions of meaningful utterance and expression generally, beginning with the nature of signiﬁcation in general, linguistic expression, the relation between individual
and species, the a priori laws governing the whole-part structures generally,
the formal laws governing linguistic sense and non-sense, the puzzling nature
of intentional content and reference, and, ﬁnally, the nature and structure of
conscious acts as such, and speciﬁcally the nature and structure of judgements which aim at truth and which were traditionally considered to be the
vehicles of logical thought. These themes make up the six Investigations of
the second volume.

Husserl’s struggle to rescue logic from psychology
As Husserl acknowledged in the Foreword to the Investigations, his philosophical career began from Brentano’s assumption that logical issues could
only be clariﬁed by psychology. However, his initial attempts at laying a
‘psychological foundation’ ( psychologsiche Fundierung, LI, Findlay I: 2;
Hua XVIII: 6) for arithmetical and logical concepts and judgements quickly
ran into problems. While psychology was undeniably useful for clarifying
the practical procedures of human reasoning and in accounting for the origins of concepts, it failed completely to appreciate or handle the logical
unity of the ‘thought content’ (Denkinhalt, Findlay I: 2; Hua XVIII: 6)
involved, speciﬁcally, the complete independence of this content from all
our psychical behaviour. The Pythagorean theorem stands as an independent valid truth whether anyone actually thinks it or not. Such thought contents possess an ‘ideality’ that allow them to be instantiated in different
thought processes of the same individual (LI, Intro. §2, Findlay I: 167; Hua
XIX/1: 8) or in diverse individuals’ thoughts at different times. Psychological analysis could not accommodate this peculiar ideal unity of thought
contents. Husserl therefore suspended his investigations into the philosophy
of mathematics to grapple with the ‘fundamental epistemological questions’
(die Grundfragen der Erkenntnistheorie, Findlay I: 2; Hua XVIII: 7) thrown
up by his recognition of the ideality of meanings. Mathematics and logic
needed a thorough epistemological grounding; through a ‘critique of knowledge’ (Erkenntniskritik) to be carried out through the application of
phenomenological essential insight, as Husserl would develop it.

Introduction xxxvii

In the Investigations, then, Husserl aims at the very ‘Idea (Idee) of meaning’ and the ‘Idea of knowledge’ – the systematic conception of the essence
of meaning and knowledge, which had been completely obscured in the
psychologistic approach. He employed the term ‘phenomenology’ to express
this kind of fundamental epistemological inquiry (see LI Intro. §7), which
looked at the very structure of acts of thinking and knowing as well as at the
objects of knowledge in terms of their essential meanings.
Inspired by his intensive reading of Bolzano, Lotze and other logicians,
and of contemporary Brentanians such as Kasimir Twardowski (1866–1938),
Alois Höﬂer (1853–1922) and Alexius Meinong (1853–1920), Husserl came
to question the idea of psychological grounding. Husserl came to reject the
account in the Philosophy of Arithmetic of the genesis of arithmetic concepts
as given which employed Brentanian descriptive psychology to trace the
psychological genesis of numbers in acts of collecting and colligating. His
much discussed interaction with the logician Gottlob Frege in the early
1890s may also have helped to accelerate the shift that was already occurring in his thinking.28 It is at least clear that both philosophers separately
were developing sophisticated accounts of the difference between the ‘sense’
(Sinn) of an expression and its objective reference. In Husserl’s case this
distinction would deepen his understanding of the structure of the intentional relation leading ultimately to his ‘breakthrough’ recognition of the
essential correlation between thinking and its object, which he says occurred
around 1898.29
From the outset of his career, Husserl had regarded Brentano’s rediscovery of intentionality (the ‘aboutness’ or ‘directedness’ of mental acts)
as hugely signiﬁcant for the analysis of cognitive acts and processes (which
Husserl called ‘Erlebnisse’, lived experiences or mental processes), but, during the 1890s, he came to reject as unsatisfactory Brentano’s account, which
seemed embedded in Cartesian immanentist assumptions about the nature
of ideas, and which left dangling the issue of the status of intentional objects. Husserl was dissatisﬁed with Brentano’s characterisation of the intentional object as ‘inexistent’ and as ‘indwelling’ in the act. This characterisation
seemed to repeat the impasse of the modern representationalist account of
knowledge in Locke and others, with its attendant problem of the ability
of the mind to get beyond its own representations. Brentano had maintained
that every presentation related to an object, but what about presentation
that appeared to have no objects? Bolzano had discussed ‘objectless presentations’ and the problem of the status of thoughts that involved impossible
or non-actual entities (round squares, golden mountains, and so on) had
been bequeathed to Brentano’s pupils, especially Twardowski and Meinong.
Do all thoughts refer to objects, even thoughts of impossible objects?
In a number of studies throughout the 1890s Husserl carefully clariﬁed his
own understanding of the relations between the intentional act, its content
and object, in, for example, his fragments discussing the differences between

xxxviii Introduction

‘intuition’ (Anschauung) and ‘representation’ (Repräsentation) in terms of the
kind of ‘fulﬁlment’ (Erfüllung) involved,30 in his draft review of Twardowski’s
book On the Content and Object of Presentations,31 and in the several drafts of
his never completed study, Intentionale Gegenstände (‘Intentional Objects’),
probably written in 1894 and re-worked up to 1898.32 The results of these
investigations found their way into the second volume of the Investigations,
especially the First and Fifth Investigations and the Appendix to the Sixth
Investigation, where the issue of intentionality and Husserl’s distance from
Brentano’s conception of inner perception are treated at some length.
Brieﬂy, Husserl rejected Brentano’s attempts to deﬁne psychical phenomena in distinction from physical phenomena and his account of ‘immanent
objectivity’. For Husserl, the main achievement of Brentano was that he
identiﬁed the essential ‘pointing-beyond-itself’ (über-sich-hinausweisen) of
the mental act. Twardowski’s attempt to distinguish between the sensuous
immanent content of the act, the act’s intentional object, and the real object
referred to, also suffered from a ‘false duplication’ of the object.33 Husserl’s
answer was to distinguish between the immanent sensuous ‘reelle’ contents
of the mental act and the transcendent ideal meaning-content of the act,
which guarantees we are speaking of the same meaning across repeated
acts, and between these and the transcendent object of the act (and not as
Twardowski considered it the immanent object).34 By the late 1890s Husserl
had developed the main elements of his account of the relations between
signs and things signiﬁed, between intentions and their intuitive fulﬁlments,
but it seems likely that his crucial distinction between sensuous acts and acts
of categorial intuition did not emerge until he began writing the six Investigations themselves. This notion of categorial intuition, a distinct intuition
of complexes founded on sensory intuition, opened up the proper domain of
phenomenological viewing as Husserl would develop it after 1901.
The results of Husserl’s intensive research during his most active decade
of the 1890s were brought together in a remarkable way in the Investigations.
Thus, for instance, his 1894 article, Psychologische Studien zur elementaren
Logik (‘Psychological Studies in the Elements of Logic’),35 sketched the distinction between dependent and independent contents that inaugurated the
theory of parts and wholes later incorporated into the Third Investigation.
But the ﬁrst real start on writing the Investigations came in 1896 when
Husserl delivered the lectures that formed the basis of the Prolegomena and
in 1899 began to prepare the six Investigations themselves for the press.
There is some evidence, chieﬂy his wife Malvine’s account, that Husserl was
still feverishly revising when the manuscript was wrested from his hands
by Stumpf and sent to the publisher.36 Certainly, it is clear that Husserl
was having difﬁculties containing the Sixth Investigation as it grew in length
and complexity and forced him to rethink distinctions made in the earlier
Investigations, including his account of the relation between demonstrative
indication and fulﬁlment of meaning in cases of perception.

Introduction xxxix

The published revisions of the Logical Investigations
(1913, 1921)
Almost as soon as the First Edition of the Logical Investigations appeared,
Husserl began to express dissatisfaction with some of its formulations and
began to revise. In his 1902/3 lectures on epistemology, he was already
clarifying the distinction between phenomenology which he characterises as
a ‘pure theory of essences’ (reine Wesenslehre) and descriptive psychology.37
But his ﬁrst public opportunities came in 1903, with his reply to a critic
named Melchior Palágyi38 – where he made clear that his concept of ideality
was drawn from Hermann Lotze, and that he was not opposed to the psychological explanation of concepts but only to the founding of logic upon
such an explanation – and with his Bericht über deutsche Schriften zur Logik
in den Jahren 1895–1899 (‘Report on German Writings in Logic from the
Years 1895–1899’), where he repudiated his initial characterisation of the
work as a set of investigations in ‘descriptive psychology’.39 From around
1905, as is evident from letters written to Scheler and others, Husserl clearly
intended to publish a revised edition of the Investigations (see Hua XIX/1:
xxiii). In subsequent lecture courses at Göttingen, e.g., in 1906–7,40 1907–8,41
and 1910–11,42 Husserl developed new conceptions of logic, semiotics, and
semantics (including the theory of the forms of meanings begun in the Fourth
Investigation, but which needed to be revised in the light of the Sixth),
offering essential revising of aspects of the earlier tentative formulations, and
leading ultimately to an entirely new theory of phenomenological meaning,
publicly announced as the doctrine of the noema in Ideas I.
Also, from around 1905 and inspired by his reading of Kant and Descartes,
Husserl was moving in a transcendental direction, embracing both Descartes’
project of prima philosophia, ﬁrst philosophy, and Kant’s project of a ‘critique of reason’.43 Husserl was revising his thoughts on the nature of the
ﬂow of consciousness and on the conception of the pure ego, which he had
repudiated as an unnecessary postulate in the First Edition (where he was
satisﬁed with the empirical ego). He gradually came to see the need for a
fundamental change of attitude (Einstellungsänderung) away from the ‘natural attitude’ as a prerequisite for the proper phenomenological seeing of
the essences of cognitive acts (‘noetic’ acts in general) and their objects
understood as pure possibilities of any consciousness whatsoever. This
reorientation shed new light on the correlation between the intentional act
and its object, understood as what is intended in the manner in which it is
intended, a conception that eventually would be named as the noema, which
made its ﬁrst published appearance in Ideas I.
As Husserl engaged in this self-criticism and reorientation, the problem of
relating these new concepts of phenomenology to his existing published
work became evident. Around 1911, with the First Edition of the Investigations now out of print, and with misinterpretations gaining currency among

xl Introduction

his followers, Husserl began to think seriously about revising the whole work
in the light of a new introduction to phenomenology and transcendental
philosophy which he was planning, and which eventually appeared as Ideas
I (1913).44 At ﬁrst, Husserl harboured ambitious plans to offer a number of
new expositions of phenomenology and phenomenological philosophy that
would render the old Investigations obsolete (see his letter of 7 July 1912
to W. E. Hocking, quoted in Hua XIX/1: xxvi). However, since Ideas I was
a deliberately programmatic work, to complement it Husserl saw the need
for examples of concrete phenomenological analyses – ‘attempts at genuinely executed fundamental work on the immediately envisaged and seized
things themselves’ (Versuche wirklich ausführender Fondamentalarbeit an der
unmittelbar erschauten und ergriffenen Sachen, Findlay I: 4; Hua XVIII: 9),
as he puts it in the Foreword to the Second Edition. The six Investigations
would remain the paradigm of these concrete phenomenological inquiries.
Husserl began revising the text of the Logical Investigations in March
1911, but only made real progress in spring 1913 after Ideas I went to press.
However, even his relatively modest planned revision, done in the light of
his new understanding of phenomenology (as expressed in Ideas I), proved
too demanding, and he produced only a partially revised Second Edition in
1913.45 This was Husserl’s ‘middle course’ (Mittelweg), as he put it in his
Foreword to the Second Edition, where he articulated three ‘maxims’ that
guided the revision (Findlay I: 4–5; Hua XVIII: 10–11): namely, to leave
individual errors standing as representing steps in his own path of thinking;
to improve what could be improved, without altering the course and style of
the original; to lift the reader level by level to newer and deeper insights.
In the revision the Prolegomena, which was written with a single purpose,
was left largely unchanged; but those passages in the Investigations that
speciﬁcally discussed the nature of phenomenology, and the kind of essential insight involved, were extensively altered and expanded. In general, the
Second Edition highlights the central discovery of phenomenology, a concept that had received only tangential and incidental treatment in the First
Edition, and gives surer indications about its nature. Thus, invoking his
1903 essay (quoted in Foreword to the Second Edition, Findlay I: 6; Hua
XVIII: 13), Husserl claims that the chief error of the 1901 edition was to call
phenomenology a ‘descriptive psychology’, whereas in fact, phenomenology
knows nothing of personal experiences, of a self, or of others, similarly it
neither sets itself questions, nor answers them, nor makes hypotheses. In
1903, Husserl had claimed that this purely immanent phenomenology was
to be free of all suppositions about the nature of the psychological, and
furthermore, it would actually provide a critique of knowledge that might
then be used as a basis for empirical psychology or other sciences. But,
in itself, phenomenology is not identical with descriptive psychology.46
This phenomenological approach brings to evidence the general essences
of the concepts and laws of logic. While both descriptive psychology and

Introduction xli

phenomenology are a priori disciplines, phenomenology cuts all its ties with
individual minds and real psychic processes, even those understood in the
most exemplary manner (LI, Intro. §3, Findlay I: 171; Hua XIX/1: 16 –
added in the Second Edition).
Husserl is now more emphatic that this eidetic science relies entirely on
the evidence of pure intuition, and operates within the ‘sphere of immanence’, bracketing all concerns with worldly existence and real psychological processes. Husserl thus imports into the text of the Investigations the
notions of bracketing, epoché, and reduction, which had become central to
his expositions of phenomenology only after 1905.47 Husserl now stresses the
remoteness and unnaturalness of phenomenological reﬂection and expands
the section (LI, Intro. §3) devoted to listing various difﬁculties that attach
to how we move from naïve to reﬂexive understanding. Pure phenomenological seeing (Wesensschau) must be purged of its inherent world-positing
tendency and associated beliefs that belong to what Husserl calls ‘the
natural attitude’ (die natürliche Einstellung) with its assumption of real existence (empirisch-reales Dasein; see LI V §2, Findlay II: 82; Hua XIX/1:
357 – paragraph added in the Second Edition). It was this puriﬁcation of
epistemology from the distortions imposed by the natural attitude that led
Husserl to see phenomenology as essentially distinct from any psychology,
including descriptive psychology. Instead, phenomenology was to be the
‘universal science of pure consciousness’.48 Husserl later stressed that the
First Edition was already de facto ‘analyses of essence’, but that he gradually came to clearer self-consciousness regarding the purely eidetic nature of
his inquiries.49
The revisions of the Second Edition constantly underscore the pure a priori,
eidetic character of phenomenology. Consider the following typical revision to
the Third Investigation. The original sentence in the First Edition, referring
to the relations of dependence holding between quality and intensity of a
tone, reads: ‘And this is not a mere fact but a necessity’. The Second Edition
reworks this sentence to read: ‘Evidently this is no mere empirical fact, but
an a priori necessity, grounded in pure essence’ (LI III §4, Findlay II: 18;
Hua XIX/1: 237). The pure a priori essential character of the laws uncovered by phenomenological insight is now sharply contrasted with the
kind of empirical generalisation characteristic of the natural sciences. To
clarify this further, Husserl replaced Section 12 of the Third Investigation
(LI III §12), which had dealt with dependence relations between temporally
coexisting and successive parts, with a completely rewritten section in the
Second Edition, which speciﬁes more exactly the nature of the distinction
between analytic and synthetic propositions, whereby analytic propositions
are purely formal and are not determined by their content in any way,
whereas a priori laws which relate to contents are synthetic a priori.
Phenomenology focuses on the essential features of conscious states in
general (akin to Kant’s concern with knowledge in general, Erkenntnis

xlii Introduction

überhaupt – a conception already elaborated in the First Edition) understood as pure possibilities rather than in terms of any empirical instantiation
in animals, humans or other kinds of minds. In contrast with pure phenomenology, Husserl now more sharply characterises all psychology as
empirical, as a causal science of physical organisms and their psychophysical states, e.g., ‘as the empirical science of the mental attributes and states
of animal realities’ (als Erfahrungswissenschaft von psychischen Eigenschaften
und Zuständen animalischer Realitäten, LI, Intro. §2, Findlay I: 169; Hua
XIX/1: 12), the science which studies ‘the real states of animal organisms in
a real natural order’ (LI Intro. §6, Findlay I: 176; Hua XIX/1: 23). Husserl
distinguishes both empirical and its sub-branch descriptive psychology from
pure phenomenology. While psychology is a valuable empirical science, the
reduction of meanings to their psychological states, i.e., ‘psychologism’, is a
natural, ever present temptation to the mind (‘at ﬁrst inevitable, since rooted
in grounds of essence’, LI, Intro. §2, Findlay I: 169; Hua XIX/1: 12), which
can only be cured by phenomenological analysis. Only pure phenomenology, and not descriptive psychology, Husserl writes in the Second Edition,
can overcome psychologism (LI, Intro. §2, Findlay I: 169; Hua XIX/1:
11–12). Furthermore, Husserl departs from Neo-Kantianism, by stressing
that the grasp of the conditions for the possibility of knowledge comes
from insight into the essence of knowledge, that is from phenomenological
viewing.
In keeping with his new transcendental orientation, Husserl has more
appreciation in the Second Edition of ‘the pure ego’ (das reine Ich, LI V §§5,
8) of the Neo-Kantians (especially Natorp), which he had originally dismissed
as an unnecessary postulate for the uniﬁcation of consciousness (see LI V §8,
Findlay II: 352; Hua XIX/1: 374). He also endeavours to improve his initial
attempts at drawing a distinction between the quality and intentional matter
of acts. In particular, he was unhappy with his original characterisation of
the sensuous matter of the act and the manner in which it is taken up and
interpreted in the act. His later account of the noema was offered as a
corrective (see, e.g., LI V, §16, Findlay II: 354; Hua XIX/1: 411).
In the First Edition, Husserl had characterised phenomenology as expanding or as clarifying epistemology (e.g., LI Intro. §1 Findlay I: 166; §2, I:
168), in that it offered a kind of ‘conceptual analysis’ (Begriffsanalyse),
concerned with differentiating and disambiguating the different senses of
basic epistemological concepts (such as ‘presentation’, Vorstellung). In his
Introduction to the Second Edition, Husserl is now more aware of a possible
misunderstanding whereby this conceptual analysis would be misunderstood
purely as an investigation of language, in short as linguistic analysis, whereas
in fact Husserl is anxious to distinguish his ‘analytical phenomenology’
from linguistic analysis. Reliance on language can be misleading, Husserl
believes, because linguistic terms have their home ‘in the natural attitude’
(in der natürlichen Einstellung) and may mislead about the essential character

Introduction xliii

of the concepts they express, whereas phenomenological thinking about
consciousness takes place in the eidetic realm where all natural attitudes are
bracketed. For Husserl, it is certainly true that the objects of logic – propositions or statements (Sätze) – are encountered only in their grammatical
clothing, i.e., in linguistic assertions, and it is an obvious fact that the ﬁndings
of science eventually take the form of linguistic utterances or sentences.
Husserl, then, agrees with J. S. Mill that discussions of logic must begin
with a consideration of language, though not issues of the nature of grammar
or the historical evolution of language as such, but rather in relation to a
theory of knowledge. Husserl is seeking a ‘pure phenomenology of the experiences of thinking and knowing’ (Findlay I: 166; Hua XIX/1: 6), experiences
not to be understood as empirical facts, but rather grasped in ‘the pure
generality of their essence’ (ibid.). Linguistic analysis is not a substitute for
a fundamental analysis of consciousness (see LI I §21). In this sense, phenomenology clariﬁes our linguistic practice and not the other way round.

Husserl’s incomplete revisions of the Sixth
Investigation
In 1913 Husserl intended to revise the Sixth Investigation in a radical fashion, but became bogged down (see his letter of 23 June 1913 to Daubert,
quoted in Hua XIX/1: xxv), and eventually withheld it when he sent the
revised ﬁve Investigations to press. Husserl now recognised that his original
account of categorial intuition with its realist commitments did not ﬁt comfortably with his new transcendental idealist framework. He made various
attempts at a complete reworking of this Investigation in late 1913 and
again in 1914, but lost enthusiasm for these revisions during the war years
(1914–18), when exhaustion prevented research ‘on behalf of the phenomenology of logic’ ( für die Phänomenologie des Logischen, Findlay II: 177;
Hua XIX/2: 533). As he recounted, he could only ‘bear the war and the
ensuing “peace” ’ by engaging in more general philosophical reﬂections,
speciﬁcally the elaboration of his ‘Idea of a phenomenological philosophy’
(Idee einer phänomenologsiche Philosophie, Findlay II: 177; Hua XIX/2: 533).
Meanwhile, he gave the manuscripts to Edith Stein who attempted to order
them into two articles for the Jahrbuch, but she could not get Husserl to
look over her work and the project stalled.
After the war, Husserl turned again to logic and eventually was prevailed
upon to publish a limited revision of the Sixth Investigation in spring 1921.
In his Foreword, dated Freiburg, October 1920, Husserl regrets that he was
unable to produce the radically revised Sixth Investigation promised in 1913,
and acknowledges that it was the pressure of friends (including, presumably,
his new assistant, Martin Heidegger) that ﬁnally forced him to produce
this new edition. In fact, Husserl was never satisﬁed with his revision and
continued to work intermittently on a full revision of this crucial Investigation,

xliv Introduction

leaving some drafts that remained unpublished at his death.50 These drafts
attempt a complete rethinking of the nature of signs involving a distinction
between signitive and signiﬁcative intentions in attempting to specify the
achievement of abstract symbolic thought.51 Husserl was also gradually coming to recognise the contextual aspect of meaning which would lead eventually to his discovery of ‘genetic’ phenomenology in the early 1920s.
Husserl’s 1920 Foreword is written in tones of exasperation and defensiveness
regarding the many misunderstandings of his work then current. He details
changes made, mainly in the second section of the Sixth Investigation, entitled
Sinnlichkeit und Verstand (Sensibility and Understanding), where the concept
of categorial intuition – originally introduced in the First Investigation – is
treated at some length. Husserl maintains that his critics have misunderstood his talk of immediacy as relating to the immediacy of sensory intuition rather than to the nature of intuition generally. In particular he attacks
the views of Friedrich Albert Moritz Schlick (1882–1936, founder of the
Vienna Circle), as expressed in his Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre (General Theory
of Knowledge, 1918)52 where he had argued that Husserl’s Ideas I relied on a
bizarre notion of non-physical intuition that required a peculiarly strenuous
kind of study. Husserl replies that by ‘strenuous study’ he means no more
than the application of a mathematician. Schlick’s criticism typiﬁes a more
general unease in philosophical circles with Husserl’s emphasis on intuition
which was seen by many as promoting an irrational intuitionism that could
not be corrected. The Neo-Kantians voiced similar criticisms of Husserl’s
concept of categorial intuition, as is evident from Fink’s reply to Husserl’s
critics.53 How could one have intuition of the categorial? Husserl, on the
other hand, understood by intuition, cognitive experiences which are accompanied by adequate evidence. He wants always to emphasise that acts of
knowing are essentially diverse and that their respective modes of intuitive
fulﬁlment must be appreciated and appropriately distinguished.
In his Foreword to the revision of the Sixth Investigation, Husserl also
challenges an accusation – apparently widespread, but which he vehemently
rejected – that he had rejected psychologism in the ﬁrst volume of the Investigations only to fall back into it in the second (LI, Findlay II: 178;
Hua XIX/2: 535).54 Husserl believes these critics have failed to appreciate
the true sense of his phenomenology, and have misunderstood it as a kind
of introspectionist psychology. In order completely to separate phenomenology from introspectionism, psychology and indeed all natural sciences,
Husserl emphasises the need to undertake the epoché and the reduction. It
was only by removing all traces of the natural attitude in regard to our
cognitive achievements that their true essences can come into view in an
undistorted manner. This claim integrates the Logical Investigations into
Husserl’s later transcendental idealism, whose treatment is beyond the scope
of this introduction. Let us now turn to examine in more detail the philosophical content of the work itself.

Introduction xlv

Husserl’s Kampfschrift: the Prolegomena
In the Foreword to the Second Edition, Husserl records that the Prolegomena
was a ‘polemic on psychologism’ (Streit um den Psychologismus, Findlay I:
6; Hua XVIII: 12), and major ﬁgures such as Paul Natorp, Wilhelm Dilthey
and Wilhelm Wundt recognised it as such, so that the Prolegomena took
on a life of its own and had an independent impact in German philosophy
for its criticism of psychologism. Husserl, however, liked to emphasise its
coherence with the second volume and wrote to Meinong that the critique
of psychologism was central to his phenomenology of knowledge in general
(letter of 27 August 1900, quoted in Hua XVIII: xvii). Others, including
Wundt, could not so easily see the connection between the two volumes.
According to the Foreword, the ﬁrst draft of the Prolegomena originated as
two series of lectures delivered at Halle in the summer and autumn of 1896
(Findlay I: 5; Hua XVIII: 12) and written up in 1899. These 1896 lectures
had already set out Husserl’s conception of logic as a pure, formal, autonomous science of ideal meanings and the ideal laws which govern them, and
offering a sharp differentiation of pure logic from the more traditional interpretation of logic as an ‘art’ or ‘technique’ (Kunstlehre) of thinking well. The
Halle lectures, however, do not contain some of the more important parts of
the Prolegomena, namely, the discussion of relativism (Prol. §§32–7), and the
detailed criticisms of Mill, Spencer, Sigwart and Erdmann, and the discussion of ‘thought-economy’ associated with Mach and Avinarius (Prol. §§52–
6). As the Prolegomena was written entirely in one cast of mind, Husserl did
not feel the need to make major revisions in the Second Edition.
Husserl’s negative aim was to demonstrate that the psychologistic interpretation of logic was a self-defeating, self-contradictory absurdity:
the correctness of the theory presupposes the irrationality of its premises,
the correctness of the premises the irrationality of the theory.
(Prol. §26, Findlay I: 61; Hua XVIII: 95)
Furthermore, whereas the study of traditional logic should have given a clear
understanding of the ‘rational essence of deductive science’ and indeed be
the ‘science of science’, in fact the logic of his time was not adequate to that
task. Husserl’s positive aim was to ﬁnd out ‘what makes science science’
(Prol. §62, Findlay I: 144; Hua XVIII: 230), but the unclarity and confusion
surrounding logical concepts put the whole project of exact scientiﬁc knowledge at risk:
In no ﬁeld of knowledge is equivocation more fatal, in none have confused concepts so hindered the progress of knowledge, or so impeded
insight into its true aims, as in the ﬁeld of pure logic.
(Prol. §67, Findlay I: 154; Hua XVIII: 246)

xlvi Introduction

In his 1900 Selbstanzeige (‘Author’s Report’) to the Prolegomena Husserl
announced that he was defending logic as a pure, a priori, independent,
theoretical science, reviving the older Bolzanian idea of a pure logic against
the prevailing psychologistic misinterpretation of logic that leads to contradictions and absurdities, and ultimately to sceptical relativism. Husserl
argues that logical laws and concepts belong to the realm of the ideal, being
purely formal, that is, applied in general to every kind of content. In the
Prolegomena Husserl makes an important distinction between empirical generalisation and the kind of formalisation required for idealisation in science
and mathematics. He contrasts this pure theoretical logic with applied logic,
understood as an art of thinking (Kunstlehre), drawing an analogy with the
contrast between pure geometry and the art of land surveying (Feldmesskunst).
Thus, in the Selbstanzeige Husserl deﬁnes pure logic as
. . . the scientiﬁc system of ideal laws and theories which are purely
grounded in the sense of the ideal categories of meaning; that is, in the
fundamental concepts which are common to all sciences because they
determine in the most universal way which makes sciences objective
sciences at all: namely, unity of theory.55
Science as such is for Husserl a regulated interconnection of ideal truths
expressed in propositions. Logic deals with these propositions and their
component meanings in their utmost generality, understood as pure categories. According to Husserl, following in the Kantian tradition, all logical
distinctions are ‘categorial’ (LI II §1) and belong to ‘the pure form of
possible objectivities of consciousness as such’ (LI II, Findlay I: 240; Hua
XIX/1: 115). Furthermore, knowledge can be about many kinds of different
things, there are multifarious objects of knowledge, not just real things, but
ideal entities, relations, events, values. The conception of scientiﬁc knowledge
must be sufﬁciently broad to accommodate this diversity of objects of knowledge. Husserl, then, wants a new account of logic as a pure a priori science,
a mathesis universalis in the manner of Leibniz. It must be balanced with a
new theory of the nature of objects in general, formal ontology, developed
in the Third Investigation. In other words, pure logic has a counterpart, the
pure theory of objects.

Husserl’s encounter with Frege – the issue of
psychologism
Since the rejection of psychologism and the defence of the ideal objectivity
of logical laws is now more usually credited to Gottlob Frege rather than to
Husserl, it is appropriate at this point to examine the relations between
these two logicians. In fact, they corresponded with one another on various
issues in mathematics and semantics in 1891 (and again in 1906). Husserl

Introduction xlvii

was one of the ﬁrst philosophers in Germany to recognise Frege’s work,
and, although he had criticised Frege’s account of the nature of identity in
the Philosophy of Arithmetic in 1891, relations between the two were collegial and mutually respectful. But, in 1894, Frege published an acerbic review
of Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic, in which he accused Husserl of making a number of fundamental errors.56 According to Frege, Husserl treated
numbers naïvely as properties of things or of aggregates rather than as the
extensions of concepts (the extension of a concept is the set of objects the
concept picks out).57 Husserl had seen number as deriving from our intuition of groups or multiplicities and since neither one nor zero is a multiple,
strictly speaking they were not positive numbers for Husserl. Frege criticised
Husserl’s account of zero and one as negative answers to the question: ‘how
many?’ Frege states that the answer to the question, ‘How many moons has
the earth?’, is hardly a negative answer, as Husserl would have us believe.
Furthermore, Frege believed, Husserl seemed to be confusing the numbers
themselves with the presentations of number in consciousness, analogous to
considering the moon as generated by our act of thinking about it. Crucially
for Frege, in identifying the objective numbers with subjective acts of counting, Husserl was guilty of psychologism, the error of tracing the laws of logic
to empirical psychological laws. If logic is deﬁned as the study of the laws of
thought, there is always the danger that this can be interpreted to mean the
study of how people actually think or ought to think; understanding necessary entailment, for example, as that everyone is so constituted psychologically if he believes p and if he believes that p implies q then he cannot help
believing that q is true. For Frege, Husserl has collapsed the logical nature
of judgement into private psychological acts, collapsing together truth and
judging something as true.
According to the journal kept by W. R. Boyce-Gibson, who studied with
Husserl in Freiburg in 1928, Husserl later acknowledged that Frege’s criticisms had ‘hit the nail on the head’. On the other hand, there is considerable
evidence that Husserl was already moving away from his own earlier
psychologism when Frege’s review was published, especially in his critique
of Schröder’s Algebra of Logic.58 Husserl was already embracing Bolzano’s
Wissenschaftslehre59 with its doctrine of ‘states of affairs’ and ‘truths in
themselves’, whose precise nature he then came to understand through his
reading of Hermann Lotze’s account of the Platonic Ideas, as he had reported
in his reply to Melchior Palágyi in 1903. Given the supposedly crucial importance of Frege’s review of Husserl, it is surprising that Frege receives
only one mention in the Prolegomena in a footnote (Prol. §45, Findlay I:
318; Hua XVIII: 172 n. **) where Husserl writes: ‘I need hardly say that
I no longer approve of my own fundamental criticisms of Frege’s antipsychologistic position set forth in my Philosophy of Arithmetic’. Husserl
now cites both Frege’s Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (Foundations of Arithmetic, 1884) and the Preface to his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (Fundamental

xlviii

Introduction

Laws of Arithmetic, 1893) as anti-psychologistic statements of which Husserl
can now approve.
In fact, Husserl had abandoned the approach of the Philosophy of Arithmetic almost as soon as it was published in 1891. He realised that the
cardinal numbers were not the basis of all numbers, and in particular that
the psychological approach could not handle the more complex numbers
(e.g., the imaginary numbers). In the Prolegomena Husserl explicitly denies
that numbers themselves are to be understood in terms of acts of counting
although they can only be accessed through acts of counting:
The number Five is not my own or anyone else’s counting of ﬁve, it is
also not my presentation or anyone else’s presentation of ﬁve.
(LI, Prol. §46, Findlay I: 109; Hua XVIII: 173–4)
While it is only by counting that we encounter numbers, numbers are not
simply products of the mind. This would deny objective status to mathematics. The psychological origin of arithmetic concepts does not militate against
the independent ideal existence of these concepts as species quite distinct
from ‘the contingency, temporality and transience of our mental acts’ (LI,
Prol. §46, Findlay I: 110; Hua XVIII: 175). Two apples can be eaten but not
the number two, Husserl says in his 1906/7 lectures. For Husserl, logical
concepts contain nothing of the process by which they are arrived at, any
more than number has a connection with the psychological act of counting.
Numbers and propositions, such as the Pythagorean theorem, are ideal
‘objectivities’ (Gegenständlichkeiten, Findlay: ‘objective correlates’), which
are the substrates of judgements just as much as any real object is. In
contrast to ‘real’ entities that bear some relation to time, if not to space,
the pure identities of logic are ‘irreal’ or ‘ideal’. Husserl characterised them
as ‘species’ in the Aristotelian sense, along side other ‘unities of meaning’, for
example the meaning of the word ‘lion’, a word which appears only once in
the language despite its multiple instantiations in acts of speaking and
writing. What is logically valid is a priori applicable to all worlds. In the Prolegomena, then, Husserl, holds a view similar to Wittgenstein in the Tractatus
– logic says nothing about the real world, the world of facts. It is a purely
formal a priori science. Husserl, however, integrates logic into a broader
conception of the theory of science.
Whereas Husserl had begun in 1887 with the assumption that psychology
would ground all cognitive acts, he ends the Foreword to his Investigations
by quoting Goethe to the effect that one is against nothing so much as
errors one has recently abandoned, in order to explain his ‘frank critique’
(die freimütige Kritik) of psychologism (LI, Findlay I: 3; Hua XVIII: 7).
While in agreement with Frege concerning the dangers of psychologism for
logic, Husserl was not persuaded by Frege’s project for mathematical logic
as, in general, he was, as we have seen, suspicious of the purely formal turn

Introduction xlix

to symbolic logic, exempliﬁed in his day by the logical programmes of George
Boole (see Hua XXIV: 162), William Stanley Jevons and Ernst Schröder,
which for him contained theoretical ﬂaws and confusions. That is not to say
that Husserl thought of formalisation as unnecessary; in fact, he saw it as
the only purely scientiﬁc way of advancing logic (LI, Prol. §71, Findlay I:
158–9; Hua XVIII: 254). Thus he praised the elegance with which mathematicians were expanding and transforming the domain of traditional logic, and
he criticised those who refused to recognise the proper role of mathematics
in these matters. However, Husserl believed that this mathematical tendency
was manifesting itself as a kind of technical ability that had not reﬂected on
the nature of its founding concepts. Philosophy must try to think through
the essential meanings of logical procedures:
The philosopher is not content with the fact that we ﬁnd our way about
in the world, that we have legal formulae which enable us to predict the
future course of things, or to reconstruct its past course: he wants to be
able to clarify the essence of a thing, an event, a cause, an effect, of
space, of time, etc., as well as that wonderful afﬁnity which this essence
has with the essence of thought, which enables it to be thought, with the
essence of knowledge, which makes it knowable, with meaning which
make it capable of being meant etc.
(Prol. §71, Findlay I: 159; Hua XVIII: 255)
As Husserl put it in his 1906/7 lectures, ‘Introduction to Logic and Theory of Knowledge’, one must distinguish between mathematical logic and
philosophical logic (Hua XXIV: 163). Towards the end of his life Husserl
would repeat this criticism in The Crisis of European Sciences, where he
would criticise this ‘idolization of a logic which does not understand itself’
and claim that a formal deductive system is not in itself an explanatory
system (Crisis, §55, Carr: 189; Hua VI: 193). For Husserl, purely extensionalist
logic or calculus could never be more than a brilliant technique. From the
Prolegomena onwards, Husserl offered a complex account of the full nature
of what he called ‘formal logic’, utilising a much wider conception than is
now current. In some respects his account of logic is quite traditional, being
centred on the notion of judgement or assertion (Greek: apophansis) and
hence is, following Aristotle, characterised as ‘apophantic logic’ (see LI, IV
§14, Findlay II: 72; Hua XIX/1: 344). On the other hand, in Formal and
Transcendental Logic (§§12–15) Husserl articulated this mature vision of
this ‘formal logic’, which for him included formal grammar or what he
called ‘the pure theory of forms of meaning’ that laid down the conditions
of meaning combination as such; then a second level of ‘consequence-logic’
or the logic of validity which is concerned with inference; and ﬁnally a ‘logic
of truth’, which recognised that logic aims not only at formal validity but
seeks to articulate truth. In the Prolegomena Husserl also saw the need for a

l Introduction

general ‘theory of manifolds’ or the theory of the possible forms of theories
to complete his account of the nature of logic in general. We cannot deal
with the complexities of Husserl’s vision of logic here, except to note that in
the Investigations Husserl was not pursuing an objectivist account of logic
as his exclusive aim. Husserl recognised the essential ‘two-sidedness’ of the
acts which are aimed at logical meanings, on the one hand there are the laws
governing the meanings themselves, but there are also the judgings, inferrings,
and other acts, which are oriented towards the subjective side, that need to
be treated by phenomenology (Formal and Transcendental Logic §8). In other
words, the aim of phenomenology is to study the essential correlations between acts of knowing and the objects known, something that became clearer
to Husserl after he wrote the Investigations.

The structure of the six Investigations
While the Prolegomena was written with a single purpose and, by Husserl’s
standards, remains a relatively straightforward piece of writing, the six Investigations of the second volume at ﬁrst sight seem much less uniﬁed and
coherent, with most commentators testifying to their uneven, fragmentary
and sprawling character. Husserl himself warned that the work could not be
considered as a ﬁnished exposition of scientiﬁc results or as ‘one book or
work in the literary sense’ (LI, Findlay I: 5; Hua XVIII: 11), but rather
should be seen as a ‘systematically bound chain of investigations’, ‘a series
of analytical investigations’ (eine Reihe analyticher Untersuchungen, I, Findlay
I: 173; Hua XIX/1: 20), which would need further elaboration through
‘resolute cooperation among a generation of research-workers’ (I, Findlay
I: 171; Hua XIX/1: 16–17). It had to be seen as a living development of
philosophical ideas, a journal of philosophical discovery.
A recent commentator, Kit Fine, has remarked (referring speciﬁcally to
the Third Investigation but applicable with justice to the whole): ‘Such is the
range of the work that it is with a growing sense of excitement that one
discovers the riches that lie beneath its rough and seemingly impenetrable
exterior’.60 David Bell has identiﬁed a threefold structure to the work, with
the Prolegomena establishing the need for ideal unities in logic and knowledge generally, the ﬁrst four Investigations clarifying issues of linguistics,
semantics, formal ontology and formal grammar, while the ﬁnal two Investigations were properly phenomenological, studying the nature of conscious
acts and their claim to knowledge and truth.61 The Investigations, then, is
more united than its outward appearance suggests, and rich in sophisticated
philosophical insights, albeit embedded in Husserl’s wordy and labyrinthine
presentation. In part, the progressive structure of the work is obscured by
Husserl’s tendency to enter into exhaustive critiques of other positions in
order to arrive at his own view in circuitous manner, and then set out again
circumspectly and tentatively, warning always of the need for further

Introduction li

analyses and distinctions to be borne in mind.62 One always has the sense of
philosophising in progress rather than of a completed system, of listening to
a great mind communing with itself. According to the author, the Investigations proceed by lifting the reader from lower to higher levels, moving in a
‘zig-zag’ manner (im Zickzack, I, Findlay I: 175; Hua XIX/1: 22), forced to
employ concepts that would be clariﬁed later in a reﬂective ‘turning back’
(zurückkehren). Indeed, Husserl’s whole approach has the character of such
‘backward questioning’ (Rückgrafen).
The six lengthy Investigations of the second volume are concerned with
analysing elements of the form of knowledge, such notions as meaning,
concept, proposition, truth (LI Prol. §71, Findlay I: 159–60; Hua XVIII:
236–7). Husserl begins with the general structure of signs and meaningful
expressions; then moves to analyse the status of universals (which he calls
species) and the nature of abstraction; followed by a treatise on the laws
governing the relations of dependence between parts and wholes; another
mini-treatise on the relation between logic and grammar as a priori disciplines; the nature of consciousness, including the meaning of intentionality
and the ambiguities surrounding the associated notions of content, object,
presentation, and ﬁnally the nature of the identifying syntheses involved in
judgement and its relation to truth. Along the way, he offers sharp criticisms
of prevailing views, including a critique of J. S. Mill’s account of connotation and denotation, a refutation of sensationalism, a rebuttal of empiricist
theories of abstraction (Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Mill), a sharpened deﬁnition of the a priori including a new distinction between the formal (analytic)
and material (synthetic) a priori which claims to be an advance on Kant,
and careful discussions of Bolzano, Mill, Brentano and others, in terms of
their views on logic, psychology and the nature of judgements and their
contents.
A basic assumption of Husserl’s understanding of knowledge is that
knowledge is essentially understood and communicated in the form of expressive statements, where a statement is a uniﬁed whole with a single,
possibly complex, meaning, that says something about something. It refers
to an object (whether an individual thing or a state of affairs) through a
‘sense’ or ‘meaning’ (Husserl employs both Sinn and Bedeutung for ‘meaning’). Of course, in the Logical Investigations, and indeed since 1891, Husserl
was fully aware of Frege’s distinction between Sinn (‘sense’) and Bedeutung
(‘reference’ or ‘meaning’), but he does not observe it since it is at variance
with ordinary German usage. Husserl prefers to use the terms Sinn, Bedeutung
and also Meinung more or less as equivalent notions (see LI II §2, Findlay I:
240; Hua XIX/1: 115) although later, in Ideas I §124, he will restrict
‘Bedeutung’ to linguistic meaning only and use ‘Sinn’ more broadly to include all meanings, including non-conceptual contents (e.g., perceptual sense).
Both Frege and Husserl agree that the sense of a statement is an ideal unity
not affected by the psychic act grasping it, nor by the psychic stuff (mental

lii Introduction

imagery, feelings, and so on) that accompanies the psychological episode.
Logic (and mathematics and the other formal sciences) is concerned to
process the laws governing these abstract ideal unities which Husserl characterises as having ‘being in itself ’ (An-sich-sein, translated by Findlay as
‘intrinsic being’) as unities in manifolds (Findlay I: 169; Hua XIX/1: 12) as
well as a ‘being for’ (Für-sich-sein) the thinker. In themselves, they are pure
identities, remaining unchanged irrespective of their being counted, judged,
or otherwise apprehended in psychic acts. As Husserl says in the Prolegomena, truths are what they are irrespective of whether humans grasp them at
all (Prol. §65, Findlay I: 150; Hua XVIII: 240). Despite the fact that the
objects of logic are ideal and transtemporal, nevertheless, they must also be
accessible and graspable by the human mind, as Husserl later explains:
. . . it is unthinkable that such ideal objects could not be apprehended in
appropriate subjective psychic acts and experiences.63
We can imagine any such ideal meaning or Sinn being entertained or judged
or considered in some way by a mind. It is simply a fact that these ideal
meanings (Sinne) present themselves to us as something that is subjectively
grasped: ‘. . . ideal objects confront us as subjectively produced formations
in the lived experiencing and doing of the forming’.64 This is their ‘beingfor’. They are always truths for some possible mind, subjective acts are
‘constituting acts’ for these ideal objectivities. The question then becomes:
how are these hidden psychic experiences correlated to the ‘idealities’? Frege
had answered in a naïve manner: our minds simply grasp ideal thoughts.
But Husserl wants to give an account that does justice to the essential twosidedness of our cognitive achievements by analysing the structure of this
expressing and grasping of meaning.
For Husserl, the primary interest of what he calls ‘phenomenology’ in
the second volume of the Investigations does not lie in identifying the
ideal nature of the idealities (numbers, logical entities, pure meanings) that
are the focus of mathematics, logic, semantics and other sciences. Rather,
Husserl is primarily interested in the mental acts correlated with these ideal
objectivities and the laws governing these essential intentional correlations
(see Hua XXIV: 172). Initially, he tended to understand these acts as psychological realities which instantiate pure essences in a kind of token/
type relation. To get at their essential natures he initially thought he could
use Brentanian descriptive psychology. After 1901 Husserl realised he was
mistaken to characterise in psychological terms what were the essences of
cognitive acts and their correlative objects. Psychic acts, like physical objects,
are parts of the natural world and are governed by temporal relations, and
other features of our contingent universe. The essential structures of acts of
cognition, on the other hand, were not parts of the world, and hence could
not be treated by psychology. Thus it was some four years after the Inves-

Introduction liii

tigations, as Husserl recalled in the Crisis §70 (Carr: 243; Hua VI: 246),
that he arrived at self-consciousness regarding the true nature of the
phenomenological method uncovered in 1901. He then realised that pure
or transcendental phenomenology has essentially to replace descriptive
psychology and that real/ideal distinction had to be replaced by a purely
essential study of the noetic/noematic structure of intentional experiences.
Husserl thinks the intentional acts themselves can be isolated as true for all
possible consciousnesses. Phenomenology does not discuss states of animals,
but rather perceptions as such, willings as such, just as pure arithmetic deals
with pure number and geometry deals with pure shapes, and not actual
shapes as encountered in nature. For Husserl, it was the task of phenomenology to delineate in advance the possible forms of each intentional act
and its limits. This is why phenomenology despite its descriptive rigour is
actually an a priori science, not an empirical one.
Husserl is aware that one cannot just assume one has a grasp of the concepts
just because one understands the meanings of the words that express the
concepts. There are concealed ambiguities in the linguistic expressions, and
so it is necessary to ﬁx our concepts through clear self-sustaining intuitions:
We desire to render self-evident in fully-ﬂedged intuitions that what is here
given in actually performed abstractions is what the word-meanings in
our expression of the law really and truly stand for.
(LI, Findlay I: 168; Hua XIX/1: 10)
The aim is to achieve clarity and distinctness in concepts by making whatever appropriate disambiguations as can be brought to intuitive clarity.
For Husserl, questions concerning the relation of the objective to the
subjective acts of the mind, questions of the meaning of the so-called adequatio
rei ad intellectus, cannot be separated from issues in pure logic. Such questions as how these ideal objectivities come to be presented to the mind
and grasped by it and so end up becoming something subjective must be
addressed:
How can the ideality of the universal qua concept or law enter the ﬂux
of real mental states and become an epistemic possession of the thinking person?
(LI, Intro. §2, Findlay I: 169; Hua XIX/1: 13)
How is there an adequatio rei et intellectus in the case of the relation between ideal concepts and human psychical acts? We have to pass over from
a naïve performance of acts to an attitude of reﬂection (Einstellung der
Reﬂexion). Husserl wants to discover the a priori relations between meaning
and its expression, and he sets out the basis of this in the First Investigation.

liv

Introduction

The First Investigation: the nature of
meaningful expression
Although, at ﬁrst glance, the First Investigation appears to be an essay on
signs (Zeichen), clearly inﬂuenced by Mill’s Logic (LI I §16), and by linguistic studies by Brentanists such as Twardowski and Anton Marty, in fact
Husserl intended it to have a ‘merely preparatory character’ (LI, Findlay
I: 6–7; Hua XVIII: 13), aiming correctly to identify the elements of the
meaning function (Bedeutungsfunktion) in conscious life. Although it contains discussions of proper names, common names, collective terms, demonstratives, speech acts, and so on, Husserl’s interest was not in philosophy
of language as such, but rather in specifying the structure of meaningful
assertion, separating out the acts which go to make up the intentional expression and fulﬁlment of meaning. In this First Investigation (§9) Husserl
develops his crucial distinction (held from early in his career) between
meaning-intending and meaning-fulﬁlling acts and the ‘unity of coincidence’ or ‘covering’ (Deckungseinheit) between meant and fulﬁlled senses in
those situations where a concrete intuition ﬁlls out the intending sense. As
Husserl’s conception of signiﬁcation became more nuanced, this Investigation was considerably reworked in the Second Edition.
Husserl begins from Mill’s claim that, since all thought is expressed in
language, a study of linguistic forms is a prerequisite to the clariﬁcation of
logical forms. He departs from Mill, however, in his account of the manner
in which proper names (‘Schulze’, ‘Socrates’) signify their referents. Drawing on and reﬁning some traditional distinctions in then current semantics
(e.g., Marty), Husserl distinguishes between the function of an expression to
intimate (die kundgebende Funktion) something to someone, and its expression of an ideal sense or meaning (Sinn or Bedeutung) which is the same in
different performances of the assertion or in acts of understanding it. Moreover, normally an act of expressing is directed beyond its meaning to its
associated object or objectivity (zugehörige Gegenständlichkeit), through a
speciﬁc manner of intentional reference (intentionale Beziehung). Finally,
Husserl has a brief introductory discussion of the different kinds of ‘objectivities’ to which things can be directed, distinguishing between simple and
categorial objectivities (LI I §12) – the focus of the Sixth Investigation.
Husserl begins by distinguishing between signs functioning as indications
(Anzeichen), which operate through linking one extant thing with another
without a mediating meaning, e.g., smoke indicating ﬁre, ﬂag is a sign of a
nation, a brand that marks a slave, chalk that marks out a house, and
expressions (die Ausdrücke), in his speciﬁc sense, that require the mediation
of a meaning or sense and refer to some object regardless of its existential
status. As Husserl says: ‘It is part of the notion of an expression to have a
meaning’ (LI I §15). A meaningless expression, e.g., ‘abracadabra’, would
not be an expression at all. This is not meant to be an exhaustive treatment

Introduction lv

of signs and signiﬁcation, but merely a distinction between different functions
of signs. Husserl is interested in the mental act of meaningful expression,
irrespective of whether it is uttered, written, or simply thought to oneself.
His account is a semantics of speaker intention. Communication is not
Husserl’s concern, because, for him, logic is concerned only with the expression of ideal meanings. The pragmatics of communication or reception of
meaning is a secondary matter, a concern for the philosopher of language.
An expression may have a set of physical sounds or written marks or
merely imagined utterance, but what makes it an expression (and not just a
reproduction of sounds like a parrot) is the mental state (or act) that ‘enlivens’ or ‘ensouls’ it. Normally, in any expressive act, the inner fused unity
(eine innig verschmolzene Einheit, LI I §10) of sign and thing signiﬁed, of
word and object, is experienced. Our interest usually focuses on the object
intended and not on either the meaning or any associated verbal chain
(unless our interest is, let us say, in assonance or in grammar, e.g., if someone says, ‘I done that’, the speaker’s attention may be directed at conﬁrming
having done something and not towards the poor grammatical form). This
is not to say that the thought exists apart from its expression. Thoughts
come to form in a linguistic way.
There are many other features entwined with the act of expression. Husserl
further distinguishes between what expression ‘shows forth’, conveys, or
intimates (kundgibt) and what it means, and between what it means and what
object it names (LI I §6). Typically, Husserl recognises the inherent complexities (even if he here does not focus on them), for instance, in communication, an expression both expresses a meaning and indicates something
to the hearer. An expression functions as an indication when, for example,
it indicates to the hearer the meaning intentions of the speaker (LI I §7).
Through this intimating function other aspects of the communicative situation
may be picked up, e.g., that the speaker is angry or is making a judgement.
Expressions, then, have a communicative function in relation to others. A
speaker endows a certain word-chain with a sense that can be understood
by a hearer, with certain ‘sense-giving acts’ (sinnverleihende Akte, LI I §7).
This, Husserl says, makes mental commerce (geistige Verkehr) possible. But
besides their function in communication with others, expressions play a role
in our individual, solitary, mental life, where communicating has no role,
and therefore the act of meaning (Akt des Bedeutens) must be strictly distinguished from its ‘intimation achievement’ (die kundgebende Leistung, LI I
§8). When an expression is articulated it normally directs interest away from
itself towards what it intends to convey, but this directing away is not a
form of indicating (§8). In silent soliloquy we may use imagined words
rather than spoken words, we may even imagine the sounds of the words.
Here we express our meanings although we do not intimate them to others.
The expression of meaning, therefore, remains an issue even for the solitary
thinker (LI I §8), where no indicative function is required.

lvi

Introduction

Husserl distinguishes between expressions which function solely to name
(nennen) and other more complicated forms, which Husserl calls ‘predicatively
formed complexes’ which are essentially predicates. Husserl thinks that the
referential power of proper names has been misunderstood by Mill, who
views a proper name as non-connotative and directly denoting its ‘subject’
(in Mill’s terminology) without the mediation of an abstract meaning (or
‘attribute’).65 Names do pick out their objects directly, but not through
indication, rather they have an expressive function that allows the name to
mean the object in different sentential formations.
According to Husserl’s fundamental distinction between meaning intentions and meaning fulﬁlments, ‘meaning intentions’ (Bedeutungsintentionen) or
‘meaning-conferring acts’ (die bedeutungsverleihenden Akte) include all those
acts involved in conﬁrming, corroborating, illustrating (erfüllen, bestätigen,
bekräftigen, illustrieren, LI I §9). An expression has to be consciously endowed with meaning to be a vehicle of meaning. The content or meaning of
the thought expressed is furthermore an ideal unity, e.g., ‘three perpendiculars of a triangle intersect in a point’ (LI I §11). This meaning is something
identical (das Identische), whose precise identity is preserved in repetition
(Wiederholung) of the expression. In assertion, we are asserting that state of
affairs ‘holds’ or ‘obtains’. We commit ourselves to the ‘objective validity’
of the state of affairs, even though the state of affairs is what it is, whether we
maintain its validity or not. It is a ‘validity-unity in itself’ (eine Geltungseinheit
an sich). We judge that the state of affairs obtains because we see it to be so.
Every expression says something ‘of ’ or ‘about’ (über) something (LI I
§11), but the object does not usually coincide with the meaning. Different
names, e.g., ‘victor of Jena’, ‘vanquished at Waterloo’, or ‘London’, ‘Londres’,
can refer to the same object (Napoleon, the city of London). Expressions
may have different meanings but the same objective reference. Similarly,
expressions with the same meaning may have different objective references,
e.g., the expression ‘horse’ as applied to different horses, to both the individual ‘Bucephalus’ and to the type, the carthorse (§12). Proper names are
‘equivocal’ for Husserl in that they can name something different only if they
mean something different, they have multiple senses (§15). On the other
hand, general names, words like ‘horse’ can have many different values but
have the one meaning (§15). In general, Husserl wants to distinguish between the meaning (Bedeutung) of an expression and its power to name, that
is, to direct itself to something objective (ein Gegenständliches). An expression names its object through (mittels) its meaning (LI I §13).
In the First Investigation, Husserl distinguishes between objective expressions and those ‘subjective’ expressions whose meaning shifts with the occasion. This broad category, which includes pronouns (‘I’, ‘you’), demonstratives
(‘this’, ‘that’), temporal adverbs like ‘now’, he terms ‘essentially occasional
expressions’ (wesentlich okkasionelle Ausdrücke, LI I §26). These depend on
the context for their speciﬁc meaning and yet also seem to have a ﬁxed sense

Introduction lvii

of their own. ‘Now’ means ‘the present time’; ‘I’ means ‘the person who is
currently speaking’. But Husserl recognises that one cannot simply replace
the word ‘I’ with ‘the person who is currently speaking’ in all contexts and
preserve meaning (LI I §26). The term, however, is not wholly equivocal,
but has layered elements, one of which depends on the context in which it is
used (the ‘indicated meaning’), and the other meaning which shows an act
of indicating or pointing is being performed (the ‘indicative meaning’, LI I
§26; Findlay I: 219; Hua XIX/1: 89).66 In the First Edition, indexicals are
treated as non-normal or derivative forms of meaning (unlike words like
‘lion’), which could, at least in theory, be replaced by non-indexical expressions (LI I §28), although Husserl recognises this may be practically impossible. Husserl saw the need to broaden this account in the Sixth Investigation
(LI VI §5), so that indexicals stand at the basis of all empirical predication,
a change of mind Husserl notes in the Second Edition (LI, Findlay I: 7; Hua
XVIII: 13). In a sense, every statement must be located in a context before
its precise meaning can be understood (e.g., referring to the ‘birth of Christ’,
or ‘the sun’ requires a certain deixis; see Husserl’s notes, Hua XIX/2: 817). In
1929, in Formal and Transcendental Logic (§80; Hua XVII: 207), Husserl
says that in the First Edition of the Investigations he had not understood the
‘horizonal intentionality’ at work whereby the understanding of a statement
requires attention to its horizoning context. A formal system needs the support of context-relative elements.
Husserl also discusses another kind of expression where the mental act
the speaker is performing is announced in the expression itself, for example,
in speech acts where the speaker promises, wishes, and so on. Husserl here
identiﬁes the class of speech acts, subsequently studied by his student, Adolf
Reinach. Interest in speech acts was revived by John Austin and systematised by John Searle.67
An important part of the discussion in the First Investigation concerns
Husserl’s vigorous attempts to distinguish between the meaning of an expression and the various accompanying images, feelings and illustrations
that intertwine with it. Husserl’s aim is to distinguish the logical content of
meaning from all accompanying psychological content (he remarks that
even Descartes had distinguished the imaginative representation of a chiliagon
from its conceptual meaning, LI I §18). A central issue of this Investigation
is the distinction between expressions based on intuition and those which
function through some kind of symbolisation. Seeing something in the case
of perceiving an object and seeing it symbolically are different act functions
for Husserl (LI I §20). Husserl was not satisﬁed with his account of expression in this Investigation and his advances in the Sixth Investigation forced
him to rethink the very basis of his account in the years after 1901. His 1908
lectures on meaning, for example, offer the basis for a revised account,
which has a more sophisticated treatment of the relation between expressive
act, meaning and empty or ﬁlled intention. In later years, Husserl would

lviii Introduction

constantly return to the essential nature of meaning intending in its various
forms.

The Second Investigation: abstraction and the
grasp of universals
The Second Investigation treats of the nature of universal meanings or
species (Spezies) as Husserl calls them. Understanding the true nature of
abstraction is important for the foundations of logic, since logic utilises
the crucial distinction between individual and general or universal objects
(allgemeine Gegenstände). Husserl wants to develop empiricism by defending
the need to recognise universal objects also, a view which is best understood
as a kind of Aristotelianism. Some critics, however, accused Husserl of
Platonism. In a remark added in the Second Edition, he concedes that his
view may be termed idealism (LI II, Findlay I: 238; Hua XIX/1: 112),
understood as a purely epistemological doctrine, which recognises the proper
domain of the ideal (das Ideale) against psychologism. Husserl in fact thinks
that the ‘excesses of extreme conceptual realism’ (Begriffsrealismus, LI II §2)
have led philosophers to challenge not just the reality of general concepts
but also their ‘objectivity’.
In this Investigation Husserl offers primarily a historical critique of Locke,
Berkeley, Hume and of abstractionist representationalism in general, with
the overall aim of understanding the relation between meaning as an ideal
unity and the act of meaning (das Bedeuten) expressing it. In the Prolegomena Husserl had already established that meanings are ideal unities, now
he wants to specify the relation between this ideal unity of meaning and
the expression which ‘means’ it, the signiﬁcant or ‘meaning consciousness’
(Bedeutungsbewusstsein). Husserl’s claim (developed from Lotze) in the First
Edition is that this relation is the same as that between species and individuals. Indeed, for Husserl, meaning is a kind of ‘species’ (Spezies) which is
instantiated in a particular act. The traditional account says that we intend
the species (e.g., ‘horse’ as opposed to an individual horse) by abstraction
from the individual, but there are different accounts of the nature of this
abstraction. One view he rejects is that abstraction is a kind of selective
attention on one aspect of an object. In opposition to this view, Husserl
wants to develop a proper concept of abstraction, freed from the distortions
of the modern philosophical and psychological tradition. He calls this ‘ideation’ but revises his views in the Second Edition since, in Ideas I, Husserl
had developed a new account of ideation now understood as essential seeing
or essence inspection (Wesenserschauung, Ideas I §3).
For Husserl, the difference between an act that intends an individual and
one that intends the species becomes clear in reﬂecting on the manner in
which evidence is fulﬁlled for such presentations (LI II §1). Husserl insists
that intending the species is essentially different in kind from intending

Introduction lix

the individual qua individual. In both acts, the same concrete object (das
Konkretum) may be given, with the same sense contents interpreted in exactly the same way (LI II §1), but we mean ‘red’ not ‘red house’, the species
not the individual. In the act of individual reference, we intend this thing
or property or part of the thing, whereas in the speciﬁc act we intend the
species, that is, we intend not the thing or a property understood in the here
and now, but rather the ‘content’ (Inhalt), the ‘idea’ (die Idee), that is ‘red’
as opposed to the individual ‘red-moment’ (LI II §1). As Husserl adds in the
Second Edition (referring forward to the Sixth Investigation), this speciﬁc
act is a founded ( fundierte) act, involving a new ‘mode of apprehension’
(Auffassungsweise), which sets the species before us as a general object. When
we mean the species we perform a distinct act which is oriented towards the
species as such and not towards the individual thing or part.
Husserl understands this relation between general and individual as that
between species and individual instance (Einzelfall §1), between ‘red’ in general and this red ‘moment’ of an object. Husserl goes on to insist (§2) on an
important difference between individual singular items, Einzelheiten (things of
experience) and speciﬁc singulars (e.g., the number 2). He makes a parallel
distinction between individual and speciﬁc universals, whereby individual
universal judgements, e.g., ‘all men are mortal’, are distinguished from speciﬁc universal judgements, e.g., ‘all propositions of logic are a priori’.
Husserl offers deep criticisms of the prevailing empiricist and nominalist
accounts of the process by which universals are distinguished in our knowledge. Husserl ends by introducing his notions of abstract, dependent parts
and concrete, independent parts, as a way of beginning to understand the
true nature of abstraction in a phenomenological manner. This leads him to
the theory of parts and wholes.

The Third Logical Investigation – parts and wholes
Husserl himself stressed the importance of the Third Investigation as offering the proper way into his thought, and, in his 1913 revision, was already
lamenting its neglect. This Investigation sketches a ‘pure theory of wholes
and parts’, called, in the Second Edition, ‘formal ontology’ (LI III, Findlay
II: 3; Hua XIX/1: 228), inaugurating a discipline now known as mereology.
With the speciﬁc view of clarifying the relations holding between the parts
of meaningful acts of expression (in the Fifth and Sixth Investigations),
Husserl here attempts to specify the a priori possibilities inherent in partwhole relations in general, i.e., the precise forms part-whole relations can
take in advance of all empirical instances (LI III §1).
Husserl is interested in the different ways in which something can be
a part, and the laws governing the relation of parts to the whole, and of
parts to other parts. Every object either is or can be a part. Wholes can
be parts of larger wholes, and parts can have parts. Not all parts can be

lx Introduction

wholes however. Wholes and parts stand in various relations of dependency
(Unselbstständigkeit) such that one part is founded on another. Husserl gives
a strict sense to foundation (a notion already present in Meinong): when
part A cannot be presented without a part B, A is said to be founded on B
(LI III §14).
Husserl’s account recapitulates his studies of the early 1890s. His starting
point (LI III §3) is his mentor Carl Stumpf’s work on the relations between
parts and wholes in psychological acts, speciﬁcally in relation to sensory
concepts such as colour and extension, or the quality and intensity of sounds.
Stumpf situated his discussion of part/whole relations speciﬁcally in relation
to psychology, whereas Husserl wants to formalise to a pure theory of wholes
and parts in the most general sense. Stumpf was inﬂuenced by Brentano’s
reﬂections on the subject in his lectures on Descriptive Psychology,68 and
Husserl also acknowledges the independent investigations of Christian von
Ehrenfels on ‘form qualities’ (Gestaltqualitäten, LI III §4), where items are
grouped in speciﬁc ways, e.g., ﬂocks, points seen against a background, and
so on.69 Husserl even discovers whole/part analysis in the ‘phenomenology
of inner experience’ of George Berkeley in his critique of Locke (LI III §2).
Husserl begins somewhat misleadingly by discussing the different ways
parts are presented and are differentiated in experience, but in fact wants a
formal analysis of the manner in which parts and wholes of any objects whatsoever cohere or co-exist together. Anything that can be distinguished in an
object is a part (Teil). Parts may be divided into ‘independent’ (selbstständig)
and ‘dependent’ (unselbtständig), according as they can stand on their own
or whether they require inherence in the whole of which they are a part.
A part may be independently presented, e.g., head of a horse, and these
Husserl terms ‘pieces’ (Stücke, LI III §2), e.g., the segments of an orange
which can stand apart from one another and from the whole. But some
parts are inseparable (untrennbar), e.g., colour and extension, and these
Husserl calls ‘moments’ and which he sometimes characterises as ‘abstract’
parts in that they can only appear in the context of a larger whole. A
dependent moment is one that depends, or, in Husserl’s language, is founded
on another whole or part. Thus, to give an example, Husserl will constantly
repeat, the act-quality of a conscious experience is an abstract moment of
the act (LI III §20), unthinkable detached from all matter. Of course, one
can isolate parts within parts, so that the whole notions of dependence and
independence are relativised (LI III §13). Husserl goes on to lay down six
laws concerning parts and wholes (LI III §14), which have since been
modiﬁed and expanded in a whole formal mereological theory. These laws
include, for example, the law that: if a is dependent part of a whole W then
it is also a dependent part of any other whole that has W as a part. In later
writings (e.g., Experience and Judgement and Formal and Transcendental
Logic), Husserl returns to part-whole relations in a somewhat different analysis but his part-whole analysis always remains central to his philosophy.

Introduction lxi

The Fourth Investigation: formal grammar
The Fourth Investigation, extensively revised and expanded in the Second
Edition, is a study of what Husserl terms ‘pure grammar’ (Second Edition:
‘pure logical grammar’), i.e., of the formal laws governing the combining or
binding of meanings (Bedeutungen) into a senseful unity rather than simply
yielding a nonsensical string of words, and is, generally speaking, an application of his part-whole theory to the ﬁeld of semantics. He speaks of the
‘pure theory of forms of meaning’ (die reine Formenlehre der Bedeutungen,
LI IV §14). The aim is to provide a pure morphology of meaning that lays
the basis by providing possible forms of logical judgements, whose objective
validity is the focus of formal logic proper. Husserl is explicitly reviving the
old idea of an a priori grammar against both the psychological interpretations of grammar dominant in his day and the empirical theorists who were
imprisoned in a false paradigm (e.g., assuming Latin grammar as the paradigm, LI IV §14).
Just as simple objects can be combined to produce complex objects, simple
meanings combine to produce complex meanings (LI IV §2). Moreover,
meaning-parts need not mirror parts of the object, and vice versa. Meaning
has its own parts and wholes. Husserl maintains that all combinations are
governed by laws; his aim is to ﬁnd the least number of independent elementary laws (LI IV §13). It must be possible to identify the rules of all such
possible valid combinations a priori, combinations that produce well-formed
expressions as opposed to nonsense (such as ‘This careless is green’, LI IV
§10). Husserl famously distinguished (LI I §15 and LI IV §12) between nonsense (Unsinn) and countersense or absurdity (Widersinn). The concept of
‘square circle’ is not senseless or non-sensical, but constitutes an absurdity,
a contradiction in terms, a ‘counter-sense’ that cannot be realised. Formal
grammar, on Husserl’s account, can eliminate only nonsense not absurdity
and is therefore not yet formal logic in the sense of specifying what can be
objectively valid.70 In later writings, notably the Formal and Transcendental
Logic and Experience and Judgment, Husserl continued to maintain that
formal grammar provided the bedrock rules for meaningfulness which made
possible formal logic, and is the basis for both the logic of inference
(Konsequenzlogik) and what Husserl calls the ‘logic of truth’. He is more
careful in later writings to emphasise that he is dealing with formal combinations of meanings (e.g., ‘A and B not if’) rather than material combinations of
meanings (e.g., ‘round square’), whereas in the Fourth Investigation he tends
misleadingly to employ examples drawn from the material sphere.71 The laws
of formal meaning are purely analytic laws as opposed to synthetic a priori
laws which govern such areas as geometry or mechanics. The core of Husserl’s
analysis is his use of a traditional distinction (but speciﬁcally developed by
Anton Marty) between syncategorematic words (e.g., words like ‘but’, ‘and’,
‘to’, ‘if’), and categorematic words, e.g., nouns, verbs (but not complete

lxii Introduction

expressions) and his analysis of these in terms of independence and dependence relations. Husserl treats syncategorematic expressions as meaningful but
dependent, incomplete parts of wholes, which in this case are well-formed
expressions which are complete or ‘closed’ (geschlossen). Verbal parts can be
distinguished in terms of those that are separately meaningful (like particles,
e.g., ‘bi-’ as in ‘bi-sexual’) or meaningless (‘bi’ as in ‘bite’). Husserl focuses
on proper names and the manner in which they name the object in a ‘single
ray’. The formal theory of meanings will lay down the formal laws that
regulate how adjectives can become substantives, how a subject can shift to
the predicate position and so on, and other rules of combination and ‘modiﬁcation’ (a concept drawn from Twardowski, who studied the manner certain adjectives modify the noun, e.g., a false friend is not a friend at all.
This Investigation had a profound inﬂuence on the work of the linguist
Roman Jakobson (1896–1982), especially on his notion of phonemes as
complex unities.72 It also inﬂuenced the Polish logician Stanislaw Lesniewski
(1886–1939) in his account of categorial grammar, and indeed ﬁnds echoes
in Noam Chomsky’s project of a ‘universal grammar’ (a term Husserl himself invokes with approval, LI IV §14). For Husserl, however, the meaningfulness of linguistic combinations is distinct from the structural laws governing
conscious acts and their contents, to which he turns in the Fifth Investigation.

The Fifth Investigation: intentional experiences and
their contents
The Fifth Logical Investigation, subtitled ‘Intentional Experiences and their
“Contents” ’, is Husserl’s attempt to sort out ambiguities in Brentano’s descriptive psychological analysis of conscious acts, their contents and objects
(in the Second Edition, these are restricted to ‘pure immanence’). Husserl
begins by specifying what he means by ‘consciousness’, bracketing discussion of the relation of conscious acts to an ego, and focusing exclusively on
the intentional character of conscious experiences deriving from Brentano’s
rediscovery of intentionality. However, Husserl regards Brentano’s characterisation of intentionality as misleading and inadequate, trapped inside the
old Cartesian dualism of subject and object and with all the problems inherent in that representationalist account. Under the notion of ‘objectifying
act’ he offers a more precise account of what Brentano called ‘presentation’,
and goes on to address what he calls ‘cardinal problem of phenomenology’,
namely, the doctrine of judgement (LI, Findlay I: 7; Hua XVIII: 14), which
is further treated in the Sixth Investigation. Husserl is especially critical
of the many unresolved ambiguities in Brentano’s foundational concept of
‘presentation’ (Vorstellung) and carefully differentiates between the many
senses of the term (LI V §44), stressing however that logic must decide which
meaning of ‘presentation’ is most appropriate for its own needs. Logic does
not follow linguistic usage as logical deﬁnition is a kind of artiﬁce (LI IV §3).

Introduction lxiii

In Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint (1874), Brentano had held
that all psychic acts are characterised by ‘directedness’ or ‘aboutness’:
Every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the Scholastics of the
Middle Ages called the intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object,
and what we might call, though not wholly unambiguously, reference to
a content, direction towards an object (which is not to be understood
here as meaning a thing), or immanent objectivity.73
In a general sense, every psychic act intends an object, though not necessarily something existent. Husserl paraphrases: ‘in perception something is
perceived, in imagination, something imagined, in a statement something
stated, in love something loved, in hate hated, in desire desired etc.’ (LI V
§10, Findlay II: 95; Hua XIX/1: 380). Brentano himself came to realise that
his expression ‘intentional inexistence’, which he claimed he had used to
express the concept of inherence or inesse of the Scholastics, had been misunderstood as a special kind of subsistence. In his later writings, he claimed
he never intended to say that the intentional object is merely some kind of
object in our minds, some purely immanent thing. Husserl rejects Brentano’s
attempt to distinguish between ‘psychical’ and ‘physical’ phenomena, but
sees his discovery of intentionality as having independent value (LI V §9).
Husserl is cautious about using Brentano’s term ‘act’ without qualiﬁcation,
but, above all, wants to avoid misleading talk of ‘immanent’ objectivity. He
insists that all objects of thought – including the objects of fantasy and
memory – are mind-transcendent. Even when I am imagining something
non-existent, e.g., if I am thinking of the mythical god Jupiter the God
Jupiter is not inside my thought in any sense, it is not a real element or real
part of the experience (LI V §11). Rather, even ﬁctional objects are transcendent above our mental experiences; intentional experience always transcends itself towards the object, its character is a ‘pointing beyond itself
towards’ (über sich hinausweisen) something.
Drawing on the older logical tradition, Husserl offers a new global distinction
between the matter and the quality of intentional acts. Acts of different quality
( judgings, wishings, questionings) may have the same matter. Not all our
experiences are intentional in the sense of presenting something to our attention. According to Husserl, sensations in themselves are not intentional, they
are not the object which we intend, rather they accompany the intentional
act and ﬁll it out. Sensations belong to the ‘matter’ (and are grasped as such
only in reﬂection), whereas the act quality provides the form of the act.
With an eye to distinctions made by Brentano’s followers, especially Kasimir
Twardowski, Husserl goes on to develop the differences between the contents
of experience and the properties of the mind-transcendent object. When I
see an object, I only ever see it from one side, in a certain kind of light, from
a certain angle and so on. As I walk around the box for example, I see different

lxiv Introduction

‘proﬁles’ (Abschattungen) or ‘aspects’ of the box, and yet I know I am getting
glimpses of the same object in the different perceptual acts. The same object
is presenting itself to me in different modes. Husserl’s distinction in the
Fifth Investigation (LI V §17) between the object which is intended and
the particular mode under which it is intended forms the basis for his later
distinction between noesis and noema in Ideas I. Furthermore, Husserl regards it as an a priori law that physical objects are displayed in Abschattungen.
Whereas Brentano recognised only three basic classes of psychical acts
(namely, presentations, judgements, and what he called ‘phenomena of love and
hate’), Husserl recognises myriad forms of intentional structure. He more
carefully differentiates the fundamental structure of judgements in a manner opposed to Brentano, who had challenged the traditional notion of
judgement as a synthesis of subject and predicate, and had interpreted the
judgement ‘the cat is black’ as an asserting or positing of ‘black cat’. Husserl
denies that judgements can be treated as nominal acts, as simply naming
complex states of affairs (LI V §17). We can, of course, turn a judgement
into a nominal act, by nominalising the content of the judgement. This
belongs as an a priori essential possibility to judgements (LI V §36). So, to
the judgement ‘the cat is black’ corresponds the nominalisation ‘the cat’s
being black’ which can then function as the basis for further judgements.
But this internal relation between judging and nominalising does not mean
that they are essentially the same kind of act. Husserl, following Bolzano,
declares judgements to be essentially different from presentations. Judgements assert something to be the case (LI V §33). A judgement articulates and
speciﬁes in a ‘many-rayed act’ the parts of the situation that a nominalising
act presents in a ‘single-rayed act’, as Husserl puts it.74 The relation between
presentation and judgement is not as described by Brentano.
Rather than operating with Brentano’s simple and rather naïve distinction between the presenting act and presented content of an intention, or
even using the broader notion of a ‘nominal act’, Husserl suggests that we
ought to speak more generally of ‘objectivating acts’ (LI V §37) which include both the nominal and the judgemental act. Husserl thinks that the
claim that all acts either are or are founded on objectifying acts is a more
accurate reformulation of Brentano’s basic law that all psychic acts are
either presentations or founded on presentations. Husserl’s clariﬁcation of
the nature of presentation and judgement leads to his discussion of the
manner in which these acts ﬁnd intuitive fulﬁlment in the Sixth Investigation.

The Sixth Logical Investigation: towards the
phenomenology of knowledge
The Sixth Investigation – by far the longest and most difﬁcult – attempts to
connect the previous analyses of the act of meaning to the notion of truth
through a deeper exploration of the relations between the acts that intend

Introduction lxv

meaning and the various levels of possible fulﬁlment, as they feature in
different kinds of conscious act, e.g., perceptions, imaginings, and acts of
what Husserl calls ‘signitive intention’ where meanings are handled in a
purely symbolic way without intuitive fullness. Husserl’s target is knowledge
and the connection with truth. In earlier Investigations Husserl had recognised a new class of categorial acts or acts of categorial intuition, founded
on sensuous acts but with essentially different objects. The Sixth Investigation is the ﬁrst full analysis of the nature of these categorial acts, including
reviewing the relation of sensory matter to the content of the act as a whole.
Husserl wants a ‘phenomenology of the varying degrees of knowledge’ (LI
VI, Findlay II: 184; Hua XIX/2: 539), carefully discriminating between the
many different senses in which something can be realised or fulﬁlled for us
in an act of perception or imagination, the relation between concept and
intuition, e.g., in the act of seeing a blackbird.
Husserl sees the paradigm case of a successful intentional act as an act
where the meaning is fulﬁlled by the presence in intuition of the intended
object with full ‘bodily presence’ (Leibhaftigkeit). Thus, when I actually see
something before my eyes, I have a fulﬁlled intuition. Later, I can relive this
intuition but it is now a memory, still oriented to the object, but not presented with the same presence or immediacy. In memory or in other forms
of ‘calling to mind’ or ‘re-presenting’ (Vergegenwärtigung) we still may have
a full intuition of the object, but now no longer with the distinctive bodily
presence that characterises perception. There are other forms of intending
which are merely ‘empty’ (Leermeinen), e.g., when I use words in a casual
way without really thinking about what I am saying, when I talk about
something without really thinking about it and so on. Empty or ‘signitive’
intendings, of course, constitute the largest class of our conscious acts, and,
from the beginning of his career, Husserl had been fascinated as to how
these kinds of intentions can function as knowledge.
Husserl’s interest in the manner in which meaning is expressed in different
acts leads him to revise the account of meaning as species which was employed
in the earlier Investigations. I can utter different sentences with different
senses or meanings based on the same act of perceiving (LI VI §4). Furthermore, a listener can understand the meaning with enacting the act of perception or indeed re-enacting it in imagination. The listener can understand
it as a report of my act of perceiving, i.e., ‘he says that he sees a blackbird’. In
the expression ‘I see a blackbird’ the sense or meaning of that expression is
not carried by the perceptual act alone. For Husserl the sense of the statement can survive the elimination of the act of perception, in other words, I
do not have actually to enact the act of seeing to grasp the meaning of the
statement. The act of perception somehow anchors the meaning but does
not embody it completely. This leads Husserl to revise his earlier discussion
of ‘essentially occasional expressions’ (§5), recognising that meaning is not
simply instantiated in an act, but that the act has its own speciﬁc form of

lxvi Introduction

intending where the meaning appears with its own mode of givenness which
the instantiation model did not adequately handle.
According to Kant, our experience has two components: a receptive element of sensory intuition and an element of reﬂective conceptuality (which
Kant called ‘spontaneity’). But Kant explicitly denied that humans had the
capacity to intuit concepts. Husserl agrees with Kant concerning the sensory
matter of most of our concepts, but holds that in higher order intuitions we
do have the capacity to intuit ideal ‘categorial’ entities, from the ‘mixed
category’ of the concept of colour, to pure categories, and at the highest
level, logical categories such as unity, plurality and existence. Husserl treats
‘categorial intuition’ (kategoriale Anschauung) as akin to a kind of perception. The ﬁrst attempt to express it comes in the second section of the Sixth
Investigation entitled ‘Sense and Understanding’ (§§40–66). Categorial intuition involves a broadening of the concepts of perception and intuition.
According to Husserl my intuition of a ‘state of affairs’ (Sachverhalt), e.g., ‘I
see that the paper is white’, involves categorial intuition, a complex intuition
that something is the case. In a judgement of this kind I intuit what is going
on, as it were. How is this ‘being the case’ intuited? Husserl agrees with Kant
that being is not a predicate, that is, that the existing situation is not a
property of the individual object (the white paper). Saying that something is
does not give us an intuition of a new property in a manner similar to
learning ‘something is red’. But this shows for Husserl that assertion of the
category of being does not involve grasping a property or the object itself.
Nor does it emerge from reﬂecting on the act of consciousness as some had
thought, rather the categorial structure belongs to the ideal structure of the
object, to the objectivity as such. Categorial acts yield up the grasp of the pure
categorial concepts, ‘if . . . then’, ‘and’, ‘or’ and so on, which have no correlates in the objects of the perceptual acts themselves. For Husserl, moreover,
categorial acts are founded on the sensory acts of perceiving, but do not reduce
to them. For Husserl, categorial acts grasp states of affairs and in fact
constitute them in the very categorial act. Thus it is not the case that I grasp
sensuously the components of the judgement and synthesise them using
some kind of subjective rules of the understanding as Kant suggests (according to Husserl’s interpretation), rather we apprehend the state of affairs
of which the non-sensuous categorial elements are necessary constituents.
In the course of this complex investigation Husserl outlines a new conception of truth, re-thinking the classical correspondence account. It was
this discussion of truth which attracted the interest of Heidegger and others
(e.g., Ernst Tugendhat), but unfortunately we cannot treat it further here.

The influence of the Logical Investigations
Although, as the young Heidegger recognised, the Logical Investigations did
not have an immediate impact on mainstream philosophy in Germany, within

Introduction lxvii

a decade it was recognised as a major philosophical achievement by leading
ﬁgures such as Paul Natorp, Wilhelm Dilthey, Wilhelm Wundt and Heinrich
Rickert.75 Husserl suspected that much of Meinong’s work after 1901 owed
a direct – but unacknowledged – debt to the Investigations, but Brentano
ignored the work.
In particular, the Prolegomena was credited with refuting psychologism.
In a 1905 study, the elder statesman of German philosophy, Wilhelm Dilthey
praised Husserl’s Investigations as ‘epoch-making’ for its use of description
in epistemology.76 The psychologist Wilhelm Wundt, too, accepted the Prolegomena’s arguments against psychologism, but criticised Husserl’s second
volume as proposing an extreme ‘logicism’ and demanding a complete reform of psychology. Husserl rejected Wundt’s criticism as a complete misunderstanding of the work, saying he neither advocated logicism (in Wundt’s
sense), nor said a word about the reform of psychology.77 In line with the
Neo-Kantian tradition in general, Paul Natorp had been an early critic of
psychologism. Indeed, Husserl had written to Natorp in 1897 announcing
that he was working on a book to dispel the ‘subjective-psychologising tendency’ from logic. Natorp reviewed the Prolegomena favourably in Kant
Studien in 1901, portraying Husserl as broadening the essentially Kantian
inquiry into the necessary conditions of the possibility of experience.78 Natorp
predicted that Husserl would move towards Kant as he came to overcome
his naïve opposition between the empirical psychological realm and the
realm of abstract idealities.79 Husserl, however, always kept his distance
from Neo-Kantianism, claiming that phenomenology was more radical.
As we have seen, in his Göttingen years (1901–16), Husserl attracted
many brilliant students, e.g., Johannes Daubert (1877–1947), Moritz Geiger
(1880–1937), Adolf Reinach (1883–1917), Max Scheler (1874–1928), Hedwig
Conrad-Martius (1888–1966), Roman Ingarden and Edith Stein, all drawn
to Husserl’s new way of approaching logical and epistemological problems
which broke with the tradition. Around 1909, the young Freiburg seminarian Martin Heidegger encountered the Logical Investigations and poured
over the work without being certain what it was that fascinated him.80 He
later recalled:
. . . both volumes of Husserl’s Logical Investigations lay on my desk in
the theological seminary ever since my ﬁrst semester there . . . I had
learned from many references in philosophical periodicals that Husserl’s
thought was determined by Franz Brentano. . . . From Husserl’s Logical
Investigations, I expected a decisive aid in the questions stimulated by
Brentano’s dissertation.81
Heidegger himself initially began reading Husserl to understand Brentano’s
account of the nature of being and was drawn especially to the Fifth and
Sixth Investigations, especially Husserl’s original accounts of categorial

lxviii

Introduction

intuition and of truth. Heidegger saw in Husserl’s account of categorial
intuition not only a method for articulating the nature of the existential
judgement but also the basis of a new way of thinking about the notion of
truth and the meaning of being. Heidegger went on to read the Investigations in the seminars of Heinrich Rickert and Emil Lask, a young scholar
who also worked on categorial intuition. Heidegger discussed the Logical
Investigations in one of his ﬁrst publications, a review of recent logical research published in 1912, where he recognises that Husserl had drawn out
the theoretic incoherence of psychologism and its relativistic consequences.
For Heidegger, Husserl had not only enlarged the scope of logic, but had
made central the problematics of judgement and the nature of evidence.82
Indeed, it was Heidegger who, as Husserl’s assistant at Freiburg from 1919,
repeatedly urged Husserl to reprint the Sixth Investigation, to which Husserl
ﬁnally agreed in 1920.
News of the Logical Investigations spread outside Germany also, being
translated into Russian as early as 1909, which version had a major inﬂuence on Roman Jacobson’s conception of a formal science of language.
Through Roman Ingarden, who reviewed it in Polish, the Investigations
played an important role in Polish philosophy, inﬂuencing Stanislaw
Lesniewski’s development of mereology, for instance. It was translated into
Spanish in 1929. A French translation of the Second Edition appeared in
three volumes between 1959 and 1963,83 but Husserl’s inﬂuence on French
philosophy had begun much earlier through the efforts of his earlier
Göttingen students, Jean Héring and later through the writings of Emmanuel
Levinas, Jean-Paul Sartre, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Paul Ricoeur and
Jacques Derrida, all of whom began their philosophical careers with critical
studies of Husserl. Derrida, for instance, has acknowledged that his whole
philosophical impetus arises out of his studies on Husserl, e.g., his study of
Husserl’s concept of genesis, written as a part of his doctoral research project
in 1953–4.84 Since the publication of Derrida’s inﬂuential interpretations
and critique of Husserl’s account of signs in the First Investigation, an
argument has raged as to whether Derrida has misinterpreted – even wilfully
distorted – Husserl’s account.85
During his Freiburg years (1916–38), Husserl became a philosopher
of international renown, in contact with prominent philosophers of his
day, including Ernst Cassirer, Bertrand Russell, Rudolf Carnap, Charles
Hartshorne and William Kneale, among others. Among his own brilliant
Freiburg students were Oskar Becker (1889–1964) and Fritz Kaufmann
(1891–1958). Husserl’s phenomenology also had a stimulating inﬂuence on
philosophers who later came to be associated with the Frankfurt School,
including Herbert Marcuse, Hannah Arendt, Theodor Adorno and Max
Horkheimer (the latter of whom both wrote dissertations on Husserl). Husserl
of course has been a major inﬂuence on both Ernst Tugendhat’s and KarlOtto Apel’s philosophies of language, and his work in the Investigations

Introduction lxix

has been compared with the equally original breakthroughs of Ludwig
Wittgenstein.
In contrast to the situation in continental Europe, the Logical Investigations was somewhat slower to gain recognition in the English-speaking
world. Bertrand Russell wrote to Husserl on 19 April 1920 saying that he
had taken a copy of his Logical Investigations with him to jail, with the
intent of reviewing it for Mind, but the review never appeared. However, in
1924, Russell recognised the Logical Investigations as a ‘monumental work’,
listing it alongside his own Principles of Mathematics (1903) and works
by William James, Frege and G. E. Moore (who, incidentally, also admired
Husserl’s book),86 for their efforts in the refutation of German idealism.87
Indeed, as Findlay noted, the Logical Investigations have much in common
with the practice of philosophy as understood by Bertrand Russell. Richard
Rorty in his Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature has remarked: ‘Russell
joined Husserl in denouncing the psychologism which had infected the
philosophy of mathematics, and announced that logic was the essence of
philosophy.’88 Indeed, one can ﬁnd many themes in the Logical Investigations which are also treated in analytic philosophy, e.g., Husserl offers his
own version of a solution to the problem of deﬁnite descriptions, famously
treated by Russell.89
Husserl himself visited England in 1922 intent on establishing relations
with English philosophers (Husserl being the ﬁrst German philosopher to
visit England since the Great War). He delivered a number of lectures which
were attended by Gilbert Ryle among others, but the lectures were not a
success, despite his meeting well-known ﬁgures such as Broad, Stout and
G. Dawes Hicks. The Logical Investigations has been discussed in relation
to the history of analytic philosophy by Michael Dummett, David Bell and
others.90 The logician Kurt Gödel studied the Logical Investigations after
1959 and was especially impressed by the treatment of categorial intuition in
the Sixth Investigation which he recommended to other logicians.91

The contemporary relevance of the
Logical Investigations
The six Investigations stand as a vast resource of philosophical ideas, some
tentatively sketched, others more conﬁdently laid out. Of primary signiﬁcance are Husserl’s discussions of the meanings of key philosophical terms.
He carefully differentiates between logical and psychological content, empty
and ﬁlled intuitions, the difference between generalisation and formalisation, the meanings of signiﬁcation and reference, the nature of nominal and
categorial acts, and so on.
Husserl’s Prologemena is still of interest for its original conception of
the nature and scope of pure logic and its discussion of the self-refuting
character of psychologism, relativism (including ‘anthropologism’). Husserl’s

lxx Introduction

critique of psychologism later expanded to a wide-ranging critique of naturalism, speciﬁcally the ‘naturalisation of consciousness’, in his 1911 essay
‘Philosophy as a Rigorous Science’, and these anti-naturalist arguments
are still relevant to the contemporary debate between naturalists (e.g.,
Quine, Dennett, Churchland) and anti-naturalists (e.g., Hilary Putnam,
John McDowell, Robert Brandom). Indeed, Putnam regularly cites Husserl’s
critique of naturalism, especially as formulated in the Crisis, but which has
its origins in the Investigations.
The Investigations are an important resource for discussions of consciousness and other issues discussed in contemporary philosophy of mind. In
particular, Husserl’s account of intentionality in the Fifth Investigation has
been hugely inﬂuential, but his views on the nature of perceptual content are
also important and relevant to the work of Peacocke and others. Husserl
has been seen as a strong defender of the subjective point of view and the
ineliminability of consciousness from any full account of the nature of knowledge, themes which have more recently been treated by John Searle, Colin
McGinn, Thomas Nagel and others.92 Indeed, John Searle’s account of intentionality strongly resembles Husserl’s, although Searle himself denies any
direct inﬂuence. Other contemporary philosophers, e.g., Peter Simons, Barry
Smith, Kevin Mulligan, are interested in developing morely precisely the
formal ontology or descriptive metaphysics of the Investigations.
The Investigations are also of crucial interest as a source text for anyone
wishing to understand the nature of phenomenology as it was developed
both by Husserl and by his followers. Heidegger’s phenomenological writings of the period between 1919 and 1928 would not be comprehensible
without a thorough understanding of Husserl’s breakthrough work. As the
meaning of the phenomenological tradition comes once more to be interrogated, a return to the Investigations to attempt to understand the precise
nature of the phenomenology that appeared therein seems inevitable.

John N. Findlay’s translation
Finally some words on the present translation. The publication of J. N.
Findlay’s translation of the Investigations helped to correct a view of Husserl
which, up to 1970, had been based primarily on the availability of Gibson’s
translation of Ideas I. Findlay has produced a powerful and much admired
translation, based on the Second Edition. In keeping with the nature of that
edition, he does not usually indicate where the text departs from the First
Edition. It is important to bear in mind that this (and subsequent editions
up to the fourth) were the ones Husserl himself authorised and a critical
edition did not appear in the Husserliana series until 1984, and thus was not
available to Findlay.93
Inevitably, given both the size of the book and the need to ﬁnd suitable
English terms to render Husserl’s many technical distinctions and innovations,

Introduction lxxi

Findlay’s translation has its limitations. There is some sloppiness, with words,
phrases, and even whole sentences being omitted. Some footnotes have been
dropped (e.g., LI IV §10; Hua XIX/1: 328), while others are incorporated
into the main text. There are some unhappy construals (Gehalt as ‘substance’ rather than ‘content’), some misunderstandings (e.g., ein Gewaltsreich
rendered as ‘tour de force’ rather than ‘act of violence’, Hua XVIII: 13), but
in the main, the translation is serviceable and the prose smooth, clear, even
elegant. While a new translation is certainly desirable, it will take some
years, and in the meantime, students of Husserl need something in their
hands right now. Given the limitations of a reprint of this kind, I have corrected only the more egregious errors, and do not claim to have identiﬁed
them all. Although not all agreed with the project of reprinting Findlay,
nevertheless I must record my gratitude to the following Husserl scholars
for their assistance: Rudolf Bernet, Iain Lyne, Sebastian Luft, Ullrich Melle,
Kevin Mulligan, Karl Schuhmann, Peter Simons, Claire Ortiz Hill and Donn
Welton.
 
Dublin, December 2000

Notes
1 E. Husserl Logische Untersuchungen, 2 vols, (1900–1), Halle: Max Niemeyer. Four
editions appeared in Husserl’s lifetime: a revised Second Edition of the Prolegomena
and ﬁrst ﬁve Investigations in 1913, a revised edition of the Sixth Investigation in
1921, a Third Edition with minor changes in 1922, and a Fourth Edition in 1928.
A critical edition, which includes Husserl’s written emendations and additions to
his own copies (Handexemplar), has appeared in the Husserliana series in two
volumes: Volume XVIII, Logische Untersuchungen, Vol. I: Prolegomena zur reinen
Logik, text of the First and Second Edition, ed. Elmar Holenstein (The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1975), and Volume XIX, Logische Untersuchungen, Vol. II:
Untersuchungen zur Phänomenologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis, in two volumes,
ed. Ursula Panzer (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1984). The only English translation is:
Edmund Husserl, Logical Investigations, 2 volumes, trans. J. N. Findlay (London/New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul/Humanities Press, 1970). Findlay translates from the Second Edition. Hereafter, the Investigations will be cited as ‘LI’
followed by the relevant Investigation number, section number, volume and page
number of the present Routledge edition; followed by volume number and page
number of the Husserliana (abbreviated to ‘Hua’) edition of the German text.
2 Husserl had originally contracted with another publisher, Verlag Veit & Co.,
Leipzig, and indeed some sample copies had already been printed before Niemeyer
took over. Husserl, in his Selbstanzeige (‘Author’s Report’), claims some copies
were available from the end of November 1899 (‘Selbstanzeige’, Vierteljahrschrift
für wissenschaftliche Philosophie 24 (1900), 511; reprinted Hua XVIII: 262), but
Karl Schuhmann thinks it is unlikely that any copies were available to the author
before May 1900. The book did not appear from Niemeyer until July 1900, and
the Foreword is dated Halle, 21 May 1900. See K. Schuhmann, Husserl-Chronik.
Denk- und Lebensweg Edmund Husserls, Husserliana Dokumente 1 (The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1977), p. 61. Hereafter cited as ‘Chronik’.

lxxii Introduction
3 While not offering a ‘system of logic’ Husserl hoped (in the First Edition) at least
to be able to lay the ground-work for a ‘future construction (Aufbau) of logic’,
see LI, Intro., §5; Hua XIX/1: 21 A edition. Findlay translates the emended
Second Edition version, where Husserl says he hopes to lay the ground-work ‘for
a philosophical logic which will derive clearness from basic phenomenological
sources’ (Findlay I: 174).
4 See Edmund Husserl, ‘Selbstanzeige’, pp. 511–12, reprinted in Hua XVIII: 261–
2, trans. in Edmund Husserl, Introduction to the Logical Investigations. A Draft
of a Preface to the Logical Investigations (1913), ed. Eugen Fink, trans. Philip
Bossert and Curtis Peters (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1975), pp. 3–4. Hereafter cited as ‘Draft Preface’.
5 Sigmund Freud, Die Traumdeutung (Leipzig/Vienna, 1899), now Gesammelte
Werke vols 2–3 (London: Imago, 1952), new trans. by Joyce Crick, The Interpretation of Dreams (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999). This work ﬁrst appeared
in November 1899.
6 See Schuhmann, Chronik, p. 363. But Pitkin’s version has been contested, see
H. Spiegelberg, ‘What William James Knew About Husserl. On the Credibility
of Pitkin’s Testimony’, in Lester E. Embree (ed.), Life-World and Consciousness.
Essays for Aron Gurwitsch (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1972),
pp. 407–22. It now seems likely that Pitkin never even began the translation.
7 Marvin Farber, The Foundation of Phenomenology (Albany, NY: SUNY Press,
1943).
8 Husserl, ‘Task and Signiﬁcance of the Logical Investigations’, text taken from
Husserl’s 1925 lectures on Phänomenologische Psychologie, Hua IX (The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1962), p. 20, trans. John Scanlon, Phenomenological Psychology.
Lectures, Summer Semester 1925 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1977), p. 14.
Hereafter cited as ‘Phenomenological Psychology’.
9 Husserl has various formulas to express the aim: ‘a philosophical laying down of
the foundations of pure logic’ (eine philosophische Grundlegung der reinen Logik,
Findlay I: 237; Hua XIX/1: 112), the laying down of the ‘phenomenological
foundations of pure logic’ ( phänomenologische Fundamentierung der reinen Logik,
LI VI §34, Findlay II: 257; Hua XIX/2: 643).
10 Phenomenological Psychology, p. 20; Hua IX: 28.
11 Alexander Pfänder, Phänomenologie des Wollens. Eine psychologische Analyse
(Leipzig: Johan Ambrosius Barth Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1900), 3rd edition reprinted in Alexander Pfänders gesammelte Schriften, Vol. 1 (Munich, 1963), the
introduction to this work is translated in A. Pfänder, Phenomenology of Willing
and Motivation and Other Phaenomenologica, trans. Herbert Spiegelberg (Evanston,
IL: Northwestern University Press, 1967).
12 See also Husserl, Draft Preface, p. 32.
13 The critical edition is published in Husserliana, Volume XII, Philosophie der Arithmetik. Mit ergänzenden Texten (1890–1901), ed. L. Eley (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1970).
14 Reprinted in E. Husserl, Briefwechsel, ed. Karl Schuhmann and Elizabeth
Schuhmann. 10 vols (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994), Vol. VI, p. 282.
15 E. Husserl, Über den Begriff der Zahl, Psychologische Analysen, reprinted in Philosophie der Arithmetik: Mit ergänzenden Texten (1890–1901), op. cit.
16 Husserl, in his letter of 3 January 1905 to Brentano, says that he was not a typical ambitious lecturer who sought to publish extensively.
17 E. Husserl, ‘Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft’, Logos 1 (1911), 289–341, now
collected in Husserl, Aufsätze und Vorträge 1911–1921, ed. H. R. Sepp and Thomas
Nenon, Hua XXV (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1986), pp. 3–62, trans. as Philosophy as

Introduction lxxiii

18

19

20

21

22

23

24
25

26
27
28

a Rigorous Science, in Quentin Lauer, Edmund Husserl. Phenomenology and the
Crisis of Philosophy (New York: Harper & Row, 1964), pp. 71–147.
The critical edition is published in Husserliana Vol. III/1 as Ideen zu einer reinen
Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. Book 1: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie, First part: Text der 1-3. Auﬂage, ed. Karl
Schuhmann (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1977), trans. by F. Kersten as Ideas
Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First
Book (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1983). Hereafter cited as ‘Ideas I’ followed by page
number of English translation and Husserliana volume number and pagination
of German.
E. Husserl, Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins (1893–1917), ed.
R. Boehm, Hua X (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966; 2nd edn, 1969), trans.
J. B. Brough, On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time, Collected Works IV (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1990). Husserl expressed dissatisfaction with
Heidegger’s edition of these time lectures more or less from their publication.
Now Husserliana Vol. XVII: Edmund Husserl, Formale und transzendentale Logik.
Versuch einer Kritik der logischen Vernunft. Mit ergänzenden Texten, ed. Paul
Janssen (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1974), trans. by D. Cairns as Formal and
Transcendental Logic (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1969).
E. Husserl, Méditations cartésiennes: introduction à la phénoménologie, trans.
G. Peiffer and E. Levinas (Paris: Almand Colin, 1931). The German text was
not published until 1950 as Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge,
ed. Stephan Strasser, Husserliana I (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1950), trans.
D. Cairns as Cartesian Meditations. An Introduction to Phenomenology (Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 1993). Hereafter ‘CM ’, followed by page number of English translation,
Hasserliana volume and page number.
Edmund Husserl, Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale
Phänomenologie. Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophie, ed. W.
Biemel, Husserliana VI (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1962), trans. David Carr,
The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press, 1970). Hereafter ‘Crisis’ followed by page number of English translation,
Husserlian volume and page number.
E. Husserl, Erfahrung und Urteil: Untersuchungen der Genealogie der Logik,
ed. L. Landgrebe (Hamburg: Meiner, 1999), trans. James S. Churchill and Karl
Ameriks as Experience and Judgment. Investigations in a Genealogy of Logic
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1973).
E. Husserl, ‘The Task and the Signiﬁcance of the Logical Investigations’, in J. N.
Mohanty (ed.), Readings on Edmund Husserl’s Logical Investigations (The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1977), p. 207.
These reports are collected in E. Husserl, Aufsätze und Rezensionen (1890–1910),
ed. B. Rang, Hua Vol. XXII (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1979), trans. Dallas
Willard in Edmund Husserl, Early Writings in the Philosophy of Logic and Mathematics, Collected Works V (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994), pp. 171–96 and 207–302.
Hereafter cited as ‘Early Writings’ followed by English pagination and then
Husserliana volume and page number.
See Dallas Willard, ‘Husserl’s Critique of Extensionalist Logic: “A Logic That
Does Not Understand Itself ” ’, Idealistic Studies 9, 2 (May 1979), 143–64.
B. Bolzano, Wissenschaftslehre (1837; reprinted Sulzbach: Seidel), abridged and
trans. by Rolf George as Theory of Science (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1972).
See J. N. Mohanty, Husserl and Frege (Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1982),
and Claire Ortiz Hill and Guillermo Rosado Haddock, Husserl or Frege? Mean-

lxxiv Introduction

29
30
31

32

33
34
35

36
37
38

39

40
41
42
43

44
45
46

ing, Objectivity and Mathematics (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 2000), and Michael
Dummett, Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics (London: Duckworth, 1991), pp.
141–540.
See Crisis §48, trans. Carr, p. 166n; Hua VI: 169 n1.
E.g., ‘Intuition and Repräsentation, Intention and Fulﬁlment’, Hua XXII: 269–
302, trans. Early Writings, pp. 313–44.
K. Twardowski, Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen. Eine
psychologische Untersuchung (Vienna: Hölder, 1894; reprinted Munich: Philosophia
Verlag), trans. R. Grossmann, On the Content and Object of Presentations. A Psychological Investigation (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1977).
See E. Husserl, ‘Intentional Objects’, Early Writings, pp. 345–87; Hua XXII:
303–48. See also the draft translated by Robin Rollinger in his Husserl’s Position
in the School of Brentano (Utrecht: University of Utrecht Publications, 1996),
pp. 195–222.
E. Husserl, ‘Intentional Objects’, Early Writings, p. 350; Hua XXII: 308.
For a further discussion of these issues, see Dermot Moran, ‘Heidegger’s Critique of Husserl’s and Brentano’s Accounts of Intentionality’, Inquiry 43 (2000),
39–66.
E. Husserl, ‘Psychologische Studien zur elementaren Logik’, Philosophische
Monatshefte 30 (1894), 159–91, reprinted in Hua XXII: 92–123, trans. Dallas
Willard, ‘Psychological Studies in the Elements of Logic’, in Husserl, Early Writings, pp. 139–79.
Schuhmann, Chronik, p. 58.
Two quotations (Ms. F I 26/83b and F I 26/12a) from the manuscript of Husserl’s
lectures on Erkenntnistheorie are reproduced in the Editor’s Introduction to Hua
XIX/1: xxx–xxxi.
See E. Husserl’s review of Melchior Palágyi’s Der Streit der Psychologisten und
Formalisten in der modernen Logik, Zeitschrift für Psychologie und Physiologie
der Sinnesorgane 31 (1903), 287–94, reprinted in Hua XXII: 151–61, trans.
Dallas Willard, ‘Review of Melchior Palágyi’s Der Streit der Psychologisten und
Formalisten in der modernen Logik’, Early Writings, pp. 197–206.
E. Husserl, ‘Bericht über deutsche Schriften zur Logik in den Jahren 1895–1899’,
Archives für systematische Philosophie 9 (1903) and 10 (1904), reprinted Hua
XXII: 162–258, trans. D. Willard, ‘Report on German Writings in Logic from
the Years 1895–1899’, Early Writings, pp. 207–302.
See E. Husserl, Einleitung in die Logik und Erkenntnistheorie. Vorlesungen 1906/07,
ed. Ullrich Melle, Hua XXIV (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1985).
See E. Husserl, Vorlesungen über Bedeutungslehre. Sommersemester 1908, ed.
Ursula Panzer, Hua XXVI (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1986).
See E. Husserl, Logik und allgemeine Wissenschaftstheorie. Vorlesungen 1917/18, mit
ergänzenden Texten aus der ersten Fassung 1910/11, ed. Ursula Panzer, Hua XXX
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1996).
Husserl, XXIV 445; Early Writings, p. 493; see also Husserl, Die Idee der
Phänomenologie. Fünf Vorlesungen, ed. W. Biemel, Hua II (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1973), p. 22, trans. Lee Hardy as The Idea of Phenomenology. Husserl
Collected Works VIII (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999), p. 18.
See Husserl’s letter of 15 January 1911 to W. Windelband, and his letter to
Daubert, 4 March 1911, both quoted in Hua XIX/1: xxiii.
In his Foreword to the Second Edition, dated Göttingen, October 1913, Husserl
records that the book had been out of print for some years, and he expresses
uncertainty about the form in which it should now appear.
E. Husserl, ‘A Report on German Writings in Logic (1895–1899)’, in Early Writings, p. 251; Hua XXII: 206–7.

Introduction

lxxv

47 Husserl explicitly laid out the method of epoché and reduction in his 1907 lectures, Die Idee der Phänomenologie. Fünf Vorlesungen, Hua II, op. cit., trans. by
Lee Hardy as The Idea of Phenomenology, op. cit.
48 See Husserl’s 1906–7 Introduction to Logic and the Theory of Knowledge, Hua
XXIV: 217–20.
49 See E. Husserl, ‘Entwurf einer “Vorrede” zu den Logischen Untersuchungen (1913)’,
ed. E. Fink, Tijdschrift voor Filosoﬁe 1, 1 (Feb. 1939), 107–33 and ibid., No. 2
(May 1939), 319–39 (hereafter ‘Fink, Entwurf ’), trans. Philip Bossert and Curtis
Peters, Draft Preface. See especially, Fink, Entwurf §11, p. 329.
50 Ullrich Melle of the Husserl-Archief, Leuven, is currently editing the manuscripts
Husserl left of his 1913 and 1914 revisions of the Sixth Investigation for publication in Volume XX of the Husserliana series.
51 I am grateful to Ullrich Melle for providing me with the typescript of his paper
‘Husserl’s Unﬁnished Revision of the Sixth Logical Investigation’, presented in
Copenhagen, May 2000.
52 M. Schlick, Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre, Vol. 1 (Berlin, 1918), 2nd edn trans.
A. Blumberg, General Theory of Knowledge (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1974).
53 E. Fink, ‘The Phenomenological Philosophy of Edmund Husserl and Contemporary Criticism’, in R. O. Elveton (ed.), The Phenomenology of Husserl. Selected
Critical Readings, 2nd edn (Seattle: Noesis Press, 2000), esp. pp. 79–80.
54 Husserl seems particularly stung by this criticism which he returned to several
times, including in Formal and Transcendental Logic §56, p. 152; Hua XVII:
160–1.
55 Selbstanzeige (‘Author’s Report’) to the Prolegomena, trans. in Husserl, Draft
Preface, ed. Fink, p. 4; Hua XVIII: 262.
56 G. Frege, ‘Rezension von: E. G. Husserl, Philosophie der Arithmetik I’, Zeitschrift
für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik (1894), 313–32, reprinted in Frege, Kleine
Schriften, ed. I. Angelelli (Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1967), trans. by E. W. Kluge
as ‘Review of Dr. E. Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic’, in Husserl. Expositions
and Appraisals, ed. Frederick Elliston and Peter McCormick (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1981), pp. 314–24.
57 More accurately, Frege deﬁnes numbers as follows: ‘the Number which belongs
to the concept F is the extension of the concept “equal to the concept F” ’, Frege,
Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (Breslau: Koebner, 1884), trans. J. L. Austin, The
Foundations of Arithmetic, 2nd rev. edn (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press, 1994), pp. 79–80.
58 W. R. Boyce-Gibson, ‘From Husserl to Heidegger: Excerpts from a 1928
Diary by W. R. Boyce-Gibson’, ed. H. Spiegelberg, Journal of the British
Society for Phenomenology 2 (1971), 58–83. For a full account of the debate
regarding the supposed inﬂuence of Frege on Husserl, see Mohanty, Husserl and
Frege.
59 Ernest Hocking, a student of Husserl’s from the early Göttingen days, reports
how Husserl recommended his students to read Bolzano’s Wissenschaftslehre.
See W. E. Hocking, ‘From the early days of the “Logische Untersuchungen” ’, in
H. L. Van Breda and J. Taminiaux (eds), Edmund Husserl. 1859–1959. Recueil
commémoratif à l’occasion du centenaire de la naissance du philosophe (The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1959), p. 3.
60 K. Fine, ‘Part-Whole’, in Barry Smith and David Woodruff Smith (eds), The Cambridge Companion to Husserl (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995),
p. 464.
61 David Bell, Husserl (London: Routledge, 1991), pp. 85–6.
62 Robert Sokolowski, ‘The Structure and Content of Husserl’s Logical Investigations’, Inquiry 14 (1971), 318–50, esp. p. 319.

lxxvi Introduction
63 Husserl, ‘Task and Signiﬁcance of the Logical Investigations’, Phenomenological
Psychology, p. 18; Hua IX: 25.
64 Husserl, Phenomenological Psychology, p. 18; Hua IX: 25.
65 J. S. Mill, A System of Logic (London: John W. Parker, 1843), Vol. 1, Bk 1,
Ch. 2, §5, p. 40.
66 See K. Mulligan and B. Smith, ‘A Husserlian Theory of Indexicality’, Grazer
Philosophische Studien 28 (1996), 133–63. See also K. Schuhmann, ‘Husserl’s
Theories of Indexicals’, in F. M. Kirkland and D. P. Chattopadhyaya (eds),
Phenomenology – East and West (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993), pp. 111–27.
67 John R. Searle, Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969). On Reinach, see K. Mulligan (ed.),
Speech Act and Sachverhalt. Reinach and the Foundations of Realist Phenomenology (Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff, 1987).
68 F. Brentano, Descriptive Psychology, trans. B. Müller (London: Routledge, 1995).
In the background also is Bolzano’s discussion of parts and wholes in his
Wissenschaftslehre.
69 See Barry Smith and K. Mulligan, ‘Husserl’s Third Logical Investigation: The
Formal Ontology of the Part-Whole Relation’, in B. Smith and K. Mulligan
(eds), Parts and Moments. Studies in Logic and Formal Ontology (Munich: Philosophia Verlag, 1992), pp. 35–45.
70 A similar point is made by Rudolf Carnap, who may have been directly inﬂuenced by Husserl whose seminars he attended in 1924. See Y. Bar-Hillel, ‘Remarks
on Carnap’s Logical Syntax of Language’, in Paul Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy
of Rudolf Carnap (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1963), pp. 519–43.
71 See Suzanne Bachelard, A Study of Husserl’s Formal and Transcendental Logic,
trans. Lester Embree (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1968), p. 7.
72 Roman Jakobson acknowledges the importance of Husserl’s work for linguistics
in his essays, ‘Zur Struktur des Phonems’ (1939) and in his Main Trends in the
Science of Language (London: Allen & Unwin, 1973), pp. 13–16. See Elmar
Holenstein, ‘Jakobson’s Contribution to Phenomenology’, in Roman Jakobson:
Echoes of His Scholarship, ed. David Armstrong and C. H. Van Schooneveld
(Lisse: Peter De Ridder Press, 1977), pp. 145–62.
73 F. Brentano, Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint, trans. A. C. Rancurello,
D. B. Terrell and L. L. McAlister, 2nd edn with new Introduction by Peter
Simons (London: Routledge, 1995), p. 88.
74 Nominalisation makes possible the shift from formal apophantics to formal ontology.
75 For an account of some of the immediate reactions to Husserl’s Investigations in
Germany, see Farber, The Foundation of Phenomenology, op. cit., pp. 147–69.
76 Wilhelm Dilthey, Studien zur Grundlegung der Geisteswissenschaften, Gesammelte Schriften VII (Stuttgart: B. G. Teubner, 1968), p. 14n: ‘Suche ich nun hier
diese meine Grundlegung einer realistisch oder kritisch objektiv gerichteten
Erkenntnistheorie fortzubilden, so muss ich ein für allemal im ganzen darauf
hinweisen, wie vieles ich den in der Verwertung der Deskription für die
Erkenntnistheorie epochemachenden “Logische Untersuchungen” von Husserl
(1900.1901) verdanke.’ [If I am now seeking to develop further my foundation of
a theory of knowledge with a realistically or critically objective orientation, I
must ﬁrst and foremost and in general mention how much I owe to the Logical
Investigations of Husserl, which are epoch-making in the use of description for
the theory of knowledge.]
77 See W. Wundt, ‘Psychologismus und Logizismus’, in Kleine Schriften, Vol. 1
(Leipzig, 1910) and Husserl’s reply in his draft Preface of 1913 (in the new
edition of Ullrich Melle), ‘Zwei Fragmente zum Entwurf einer Vorrede zur zweiten

Introduction lxxvii

78

79
80
81
82

83
84
85

86
87
88
89
90
91
92

Auﬂage der Logischen Untersuchungen’, to appear in Husserliana series. Husserl
is very critical of Wundt’s misreading: exclaiming at one point: ‘One cannot read
the Logical Investigations like a newspaper’.
Paul Natorp, ‘Zur Frage der logischen Methode. Mit Beziehung auf Edmund
Husserls Prolegomena zur reinen Logik’, Kant Studien 6 (1901), 270ff., reprinted
in H. Noack (ed.), Husserl (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1973),
pp. 1–15, trans. as ‘On the Question of Logical Method in Relation to Edmund
Husserl’s Prolegomena to Pure Logic’, by J. N. Mohanty, in J. N. Mohanty
(ed.), Readings on Edmund Husserl’s Logical Investigations (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1977), pp. 55–66.
See Natorp, ‘Zur Frage der logischen Methode’, pp. 270ff, and Iso Kern, Husserl
und Kant (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1964), p. 31.
Martin Heidegger, Zur Sache des Denkens (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1969), trans. as
‘My Way to Phenomenology’, by Joan Stambaugh, in M. Heidegger, On Time
and Being (New York: Harper & Row, 1972), pp. 74–82.
Ibid., pp. 74–5.
Martin Heidegger, ‘Neuere Forschungen über Logik’, Literarische Rundschau für
das katholische Deutschland 38, 10 (1 Oct. 1912), cols 465–72; 11, cols 517–24;
No. 12, cols 565–70, reprinted in M. Heidegger, Frühe Schriften (1912–1916), ed.
F.-W. Von Hermann (Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1978), pp. 17–43.
E. Husserl, Recherches logiques, trans. from the German by Hubert Elie, Arion
L. Kelkel and René Schérer, 3 vols (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1959–63).
J. Derrida, Le Problème de la genèse dans la philosophie de Husserl (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1990).
See J. Derrida, La Voix et le phénomène (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1967), ed. and trans. David Allison as Speech and Phenomena and Other Essays
on Husserl’s Theory of Signs (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1973).
For a critique of Derrida’s interpretation see J. Claude Evans, Strategies of Deconstruction. Derrida and the Myth of the Voice (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1991).
W. R. Boyce-Gibson records in his diary that Moore admired the Investigations,
see his ‘From Husserl to Heidegger’, ed. Spiegelberg, p. 66.
B. Russell, Skeptical Essays (New York: W. W. Norton, 1928), pp. 70–1.
Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
1980), p. 166.
An indication of this recent analytic interest in Husserl is to be seen in Woodruff
Smith (ed.), Cambridge Companion to Husserl.
Michael Dummett, Origins of Analytic Philosophy (London: Duckworth, 1993),
pp. 43–56; Bell, Husserl.
See Richard Tieszen, ‘Gödel’s Path from the Incompleteness Theorems (1931) to
Phenomenology (1961)’, Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 4, 2 (June 1998), 181–203.
See John R. Searle, The Mystery of Consciousness (London: Granta, 1997), p. 5:
‘Consciousness so deﬁned is an inner, ﬁrst-person, qualitative phenomenon’; Colin
McGinn, The Subjective View (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), and
Thomas Nagel, The View From Nowhere (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986),
whose central problem is the relation between the perspective of a person within
the world and the objective view of the world which includes that person and
his or her viewpoint. For Husserl’s defence of the ﬁrst-person, see David Carr,
The Paradox of Subjectivity (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), p. 77:
‘[Husserl’s] phenomenology is not just about experiences but about the ﬁrstperson standpoint itself’.

lxxviii Introduction
93 See note 1 above. Even the critical edition has been criticised for not retaining
Husserl’s own particular orthographical conventions, and for taking the Second
Edition (B text) as basic and showing the First Edition (A text) only in footnotes.
Findlay began his translation of the Fifth and Sixth Investigations before the
Second World War but was unable to gain the publishing permissions until 1961.

Select bibliography

Primary Sources
Husserl, Edmund (1956– ) Gesammelte Werke. Husserliana. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund (1996) Gesammelte Schriften. Hamburg: Meiner.
Husserl, Edmund (1999) Erfahrung und Urteil: Untersuchungen der Genealogie der
Logik, hrsg. L. Landgrebe. Hamburg: Meiner.

Husserl in Translation
Husserl, Edmund (1964) Philosophy as a Rigorous Science, 1911, in Quentin Lauer,
Edmund Husserl. Phenomenology and the Crisis of Philosophy, New York: Harper
& Row.
Husserl, Edmund (1967) Cartesian Meditations, trans. Dorion Cairns, The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund (1969) Formal and Transcendental Logic, trans. Dorion Cairns,
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund (1970) The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy, trans. David Carr,
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Husserl, Edmund (1973) Experience and Judgment: Investigations in a Genealogy of
Logic, trans. J. S. Churchill and Karl Ameriks, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Husserl, Edmund (1975) Introduction to the Logical Investigations. Draft of a Preface
to the Logical Investigations, ed. E. Fink, trans. P. J. Bossert and C. H. Peters, The
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund (1977) Phenomenological Psychology. Lectures, Summer Semester
1925, trans. J. Scanlon, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund (1981) Husserl. Shorter Works, trans. and ed. Frederick Elliston
and Peter McCormick, Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Husserl, Edmund (1983) Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a
Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book, trans. F. Kersten, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund (1989) Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, Second Book, trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer,
Dordrecht: Kluwer.

lxxx Select bibliography
Husserl, Edmund (1990) On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal
Time, trans. J.B. Brough, Collected Works IV, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund (1994) Early Writings in the Philosophy of Logic and Mathematics,
trans. Dallas Willard, Collected Works V, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund (1997) Thing and Space: Lectures of 1907, trans. R. Rojcewicz,
Collected Works VII, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund (1999) The Idea of Phenomenology, trans. Lee Hardy. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund (1999) The Essential Husserl, ed. Donn Welton, Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.

Further Reading
Bell, David (1990) Husserl, London: Routledge.
Bernet, Rudolf, Iso Kern and Eduard Marbach (1993) An Introduction to Husserlian
Phenomenology. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
DeBoer, Theodor (1978) The Development of Husserl’s Thought. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff.
Derrida, Jacques (1973) Speech and Phenomena and Other Essays on Husserl’s Theory
of Signs, ed. and trans. David Allison, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. (ed.) (1982) Husserl, Intentionality and Cognitive Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dummett, Michael (1991) Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics, London: Duckworth.
Dummett, Michael (1991) Frege and Other Philosophers, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dummett, Michael (1993) Origins of Analytic Philosophy, London: Duckworth.
Elveton, R. O. (ed.) (2000) The Phenomenology of Husserl. Selected Critical Readings, 2nd edn, Seattle: Noesis Press.
Farber, Marvin (1943) The Foundation of Phenomenology, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Levinas, Emmanuel (1973) The Theory of Intuition in Husserl’s Phenomenology, trans.
A. Orianne, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Mohanty, J. N. (ed.) (1977) Readings on Husserl’s Logical Investigations, The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.
Mohanty, J. N. (1982) Husserl and Frege, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Moran, Dermot (2000) Introduction to Phenomenology. London and New York:
Routledge.
Moran, Dermot (2000) ‘Heidegger’s Critique of Husserl’s and Brentano’s Accounts
of Intentionality’, Inquiry 43: 39–66.
Mulligan, Kevin and Smith, Barry (1986) ‘Husserl’s Logical Investigations’, Grazer
Philosophische Studien 27: 199–207.
Ricoeur, Paul (1967) Husserl. An Analysis of his Philosophy, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Schérer, René (1967) La Phénoménologie des ‘Recherches Logiques’ de Husserl, Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France.

Select bibliography

lxxxi

Schuhmann, Karl (1977) Husserl-Chronik. Denk- und Lebensweg Edmund Husserls,
Husserliana Dokumente 1, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Sepp, Hans Rainer (ed.) (1988) Edmund Husserl und die phänomenologische Bewegung.
Zeugnisse in Text und Bild, Freiburg/Munich: Karl Alber Verlag.
Smith, Barry and Woodruff Smith, David (eds) (1995) The Cambridge Companion to
Husserl, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sokolowski, Robert (1971) ‘The Structure and Content of Husserl’s Logical Investigations’, Inquiry 14: 318–50.
Sokolowski, Robert (2000) Introduction to Phenomenology, Cambridge: Cambridge
Univesity Press.
Spiegelberg, Herbert (1994) The Phenomenological Movement. A Historical Introduction, 3rd revised and enlarged edition with the assistance of Karl Schuhmann,
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Ströker, Elizabeth (1993) Husserl’s Transcendental Phenomenology. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Taminiaux, Jacques (1985) ‘Heidegger and Husserl’s Logical Investigations’, in Dialectic and Difference, New Jersey: Humanities Press, 91–114.

HH

Translator’s Introduction
(Abridged)

I have been largely, but not absolutely uniform, in my translation of the
key-terms, since my aim has been to render their sense, which demands
adaptation to their German or English context, rather than to provide a
code from which the German can be uniformly inferred from the English.
The German text is, after all, again available, even if, regrettably it was long
out of print. And Husserl, despite his prolixity and technicality, conforms to
the Keynesian description of a Cambridge philosopher as ‘a prose writer,
hoping to be understood’; he is not a hierophant, requiring a word-for-word
translation of his dark locutions in the hope that some of their doubtful
sense will be preserved. I have translated Vorstellung almost uniformly by
‘presentation’, recognizing that the latter is not really an English word: the
concept expressed by Husserl’s (and Brentano’s) term is not an English
concept either. ‘Idea’ is required for other purposes, and is in any case
ambiguous, and ‘representation’, if anyone can tolerate it, is required for the
cases where Husserl uses Repräsentation, Darstellung etc. Anschauung
(anschaulich etc.) I have rendered by ‘intuition’ (‘intuitive’ etc.) since this is
the traditional rendering of the term in translations of Kant, and since the
word has no proper equivalent in English. I have occasionally varied this
use by substituting or adding such terms as ‘envisage’, ‘illustrate’, ‘picture’,
‘see’, and their derivatives. Einsicht etc., which more properly means ‘intuition’ as understood in English, I have translated by ‘insight’ etc., though
sometimes I have talked of ‘perspicuity’ etc. I have translated Idee by ‘Idea’
and Spezies by ‘Species’, capitalizing both terms where ideal entities are in
question. I have sometimes capitalized terms, e.g. ‘Perception’, where ideal
notions were intended, but in general I have been inconsistently sparing
with capitals, as I believe that they readily become tyrannous and obfuscate
sense. I have translated Erlebnis (erleben etc.) by ‘experience’, though I have
sometimes substituted ‘lived experience’, ‘live through’ etc.; I have not devised a separate word for Erfabhung, since Husserl often uses the words
interchangeably, and since the English word is used in two ways, clear in the
context, and is in fact practically two words. ‘Having an experience’ and
‘learning by experience’ obviously involve two distinct, though cognate, uses

lxxxiv

Translator’s introduction

of the word ‘experience’. I have translated psychisch by ‘mental’ in informal
contexts like the Prolegomena where ‘psychical’ would be strained, but I
have used ‘psychical’ where Brentano’s technical use, and its contrast with
physisch, was in question. I have indicated the difference between real and
reell (meaning ‘in the world of natural things’ and ‘actually part of’ respectively) by putting the German word in brackets after an English use of
‘real’. I am not convinced that Husserl meant much by his solemn distinction of these two terms, and I regret the necessity of translating wirklich by
‘actual’, when ‘real’ is often more suitable. It is curious that Husserl should
have used the word real of a thing-like status which need not involve ‘reality’ in the sense of genuine existence, and which he came afterwards to hold
never involved ‘reality’ in the English sense. I have translated schlicht by
‘straightforward’, and eigentlich (in technical contexts) by ‘authentic’, and I
have translated unselbständig by ‘non-independent’, since the English word
‘dependent’ has less negativity and more relativity than unselbständig. Sometimes I have also had trafﬁc with ‘self-sufﬁcient’ for selbständig, instead of
‘independent’. Inhalt I have, of course, translated by ‘content’, but this makes
difﬁculties in the case of other words for which ‘content’ alone seems suitable: Gehalt, e.g. has been badly translated by ‘substance’. Fundieren, fundierte
etc., are of course ‘found’, ‘founded’ (though sometimes I have yielded to
the charms of ‘basing’, ‘based’ etc.) but fundierend has varied from
‘foundational’ to ‘underlying’ according to context or euphony. Moment I
have usually translated as ‘moment’, but sometimes, in less technical contexts, as ‘side’ or ‘aspect’. Bedeutung in the sense of signiﬁcant content I
have translated by ‘meaning’, less commonly by ‘sense’: Husserl does not
follow Frege in keeping the two words distinct, and neither ever means the
object of a reference. The word bedeuten I have translated by ‘act of meaning’ or simply by the verb ‘to mean’, though I have sometimes used ‘refer’,
‘reference’ as an equivalent. Husserl in the main tends to say that we mean
objects, not meanings, by way of the meanings which words have rather than
mean, and I have followed his usage in English, with which it on the whole
agrees, rather than trying to introduce distinctions into my translation which
have only recently been thought necessary. Wahrnehmen, Wahrnehmung etc.,
I have translated by ‘perceive’, ‘perception’, the established equivalents,
though when a Wahrnehmung means an individual act, I have, for the sake
of shortness, translated it by ‘percept’. Innere Wahrnehmung has been translated by ‘inner’, ‘inward’ or ‘internal perception’ quite without principle,
and the same holds mutatis mutandis of aüssere Wahrnehmung. Erkennen,
Erkenntnis I have generally translated by ‘know’, ‘knowledge’, though there
are contexts, particularly in the Sixth Investigation where ‘cognize’, ‘cognition’, ‘recognize’, ‘recognition’ seemed more suitable. Evidenz and its derivatives I have rendered by ‘self-evidence’, ‘inward evidence’ according to
context: there are cases of Evidenz, e.g. those of innere Wahrnehmung, which
have no self-evidence in the English sense. The adjective evident I have

Translator’s introduction lxxxv

sometimes translated by ‘evident’, but in general I have found that the
forensic and documentary associations of the English word ‘evidence’ are
fatal to understanding. Many students are permanently bewildered by these
associations. That a similar thing holds of ‘reﬂection’, ‘reﬂective’ etc., used
to translate the German word where it has to do with introspection, and not
with ‘reﬂection’ as we ordinarily understand it, has not led me to depart
from the use in question. After all, Locke’s similar use of ‘reﬂection’ has
misled, and always will mislead, countless incautious and forgetful students.
I have translated begründen, Begründung etc., by ‘grounding’ etc., also by
‘prove’ (‘proof’), ‘demonstrate’ (‘demonstration’), ‘validate’ (‘validation’). It
expresses a reversed view of argument more usual to Continental than to
British intellectuals. With these explanations, it is to be hoped that Husserl
can speak for himself.
. . 
Yale University

Foreword

(First German Edition, Volume I, 1900)
The Logical Investigations whose publication begins with these Prolegomena,
have arisen out of unavoidable problems which have constantly hindered,
and ﬁnally interrupted, the progress of my efforts, spread over many years,
at achieving a philosophical clariﬁcation of pure mathematics. Together
with questions regarding the origin of the basic concepts and insights of
mathematics, these efforts were especially concerned with difﬁcult questions of mathematical theory and method. The expositions of the traditional
logic, so often reformulated, should have succeeded in providing us with an
intelligible and perspicuous account of the rational essence of deductive
science, with its formal unity and symbolic methodology. A study of the actually given deductive sciences, however, left all these things problematic and
obscure. The deeper that my analyses penetrated, the more conscious I
became that the logic of our time was not adequate to that actual science
which it was none the less its function to elucidate.
I was plunged into peculiar difﬁculties by my logical researches into formal arithmetic and the theory of manifolds, a discipline and method which
stretches far beyond all peculiarities of the special forms of number and
extension. They forced me into discussions of a very general sort, which
lifted me above the narrow sphere of mathematics, and pushed me towards
a universal theory of formal deductive systems. There were many sets of
problems that then bore down upon me, of which I shall here mention only
a single one.
There were evidently possibilities of generalizing (transforming) formal
arithmetic, so that, without essential alteration of its theoretical character
and methods of calculation, it could be taken beyond the ﬁeld of quantity,
and this made me see that quantity did not at all belong to the most universal essence of the mathematical or the ‘formal’, or to the method of calculation which has its roots in this essence. I then came to see in ‘mathematicizing
logic’ a mathematics which was indeed free from quantity, while remaining
none the less an indefeasible discipline having mathematical form and method,

2 Foreword

which in part dealt with the old syllogisms, in part with new forms of inference
quite alien to tradition. Important problems then loomed before me regarding the universal essence of the mathematical as such, and the natural
connection, or the possible boundaries, between systems of quantitative and
non-quantitative mathematics, and especially, e.g., regarding arithmetical
and logical formality. Naturally, I also had to go on from this point to more
fundamental questions regarding the essence of the form of knowledge in
contradistinction to its matter, and the sense of the distinction between
formal (pure) and material properties, truths and laws.
But in another quite different direction I also found myself involved in
problems of general logic and epistemology. I began work on the prevailing
assumption that psychology was the science from which logic in general,
and the logic of the deductive sciences, had to hope for philosophical clariﬁcation. For this reason psychological researches occupy a very large place in
the ﬁrst (the only published) volume of my Philosophy of Arithmetic. There
were, however, connections in which such a psychological foundation never
came to satisfy me. Where one was concerned with questions as to the origin
of mathematical presentations, or with the elaboration of those practical
methods which are indeed psychologically determined, psychological analyses seemed to me to promote clearness and instruction. But once one had
passed from the psychological connections of thinking, to the logical unity
of the thought-content (the unity of theory), no true continuity and unity
could be established. I became more and more disquieted by doubts of
principle, as to how to reconcile the objectivity of mathematics, and of all
science in general, with a psychological foundation for logic. In this manner
my whole method, which I had taken over from the convictions of the
reigning logic, that sought to illuminate the given science through psychological analyses, became shaken, and I felt myself more and more pushed
towards general critical reﬂections on the essence of logic, and on the relationship, in particular, between the subjectivity of knowing and the objectivity of the content known. Logic left me in the lurch wherever I hoped it
would give me deﬁnite answers to the deﬁnite questions I put to it, and I
was eventually compelled to lay aside my philosophical-mathematical investigations, until I had succeeded in reaching a certain clearness on the basic
questions of epistemology and in the critical understanding of logic as a
science.
If I now publish these essays, the product of many years of work, on a
new foundation of pure logic and epistemology, I do so in the conviction that
I shall not be misunderstood for independently choosing a path remote
from that of prevailing logical trends, in view of the grave, factually based
motives that have inspired me. The course of my development has led to my
drawing apart, as regards basic logical convictions, from men and writings
to whom I owe most of my philosophical education, and to my drawing
rather closer to a group of thinkers whose writings I was not able to estimate

Foreword

3

rightly, and whom I consulted all too little in the course of my labours. I
have had, however, unfortunately to abstain from any subsequent insertion
of comprehensive literary and critical references to researches having an
afﬁnity with my own. As regards my frank critique of the psychologistic
logic and epistemology, I have but to recall Goethe’s saying: There is nothing to which one is more severe than the errors that one has just abandoned.
. 
Halle a. d. S. May 21st 1900

(Second German Edition, Volume I, 1913)
The question as to the form in which I should undertake to republish the
present work, out of print for some years, has caused me no little concern.
My Logical Investigations were my ‘break-through’, not an end but rather a
beginning. When the work had been printed, my studies continued forthwith. I tried to give a fuller account of the meaning, the method and the
philosophical scope of phenomenology, to pursue the woven threads of my
problems further in every direction, and to track down and tackle parallel
problems in all ontic and phenomenological ﬁelds. Understandably, as the
horizon of my research widened, and as I became better acquainted with
the intentional ‘modiﬁcations’ so perplexingly built on one another, with the
multiply interlacing structures of consciousness, there came a shift in many of
the conceptions formed in my ﬁrst penetration of the new territory. Remaining obscurities were cleared up, ambiguities removed, isolated observations
to which at the start no special importance could be given, gained fundamental meaning as one passed over into larger contexts. Everywhere, in brief,
there were not merely supplementations but transvaluations in one’s original
ﬁeld of research, and from the point of view of one’s widened, deepened
knowledge, even the arrangement of one’s treatments no longer seemed
quite adequate. The sense and the extent of these forward steps, and their
widening effect on one’s ﬁeld of research comes out in the recently published
First Book of my Ideas towards a pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological
Philosophy, printed in the ﬁrst volume of the Jahrbuch für Philosophie und
phänomenologische Forschung (1913), and the publication of the two remaining Books, which will follow immediately, will show this still better.
I originally cherished the hope that, after discovering and exploring the
radical problems of pure phenomenology and phenomenological philosophy,
I should be able to present a series of systematic expositions that would
render a reprinting of the old work unnecessary, in so far as its content, not
at all jettisoned, but purged and divided according to subject, would come
into its own in association with the new work. But when execution began, a
serious objection at once raised itself. Many years would be needed for the
carrying out of the extensive, difﬁcult task of imposing literary unity on our

4 Foreword

Investigations: though they stood there complete and concrete, they would
have for the most part to be expounded anew and to have their difﬁculties
ironed out. I therefore decided ﬁrst of all to plan my Ideas. They were to
give a universal, yet contentful presentation of the new phenomenology,
based throughout on actually executed work, a presentation of its method, of
its systematic ﬁeld of problems, of its function in making possible a strictly
scientiﬁc philosophy, as well as a reduction to rational theory of empirical
psychology. After all this, the Logical Investigations would be republished,
and that in a better form, adapted to the standpoint of the Ideas, and so
helping to introduce the reader to the nature of genuinely phenomenological
and epistemological work. For if these Investigations are to prove helpful
to those interested in phenomenology, this will be because they do not offer
us a mere programme (certainly not one of the high-ﬂying sort which so
encumber philosophy) but that they are attempts at genuinely executed fundamental work on the immediately envisaged and seized things themselves.
Even where they proceed critically, they do not lose themselves in discussions of standpoint, but rather leave the last word to the things themselves,
and to one’s work upon such things. The Ideas ought in effect to rest on the
work of the Logical Investigations. If, through the latter, the reader has been
brought openly to investigate and concern himself with a group of fundamental questions, then the Ideas, with their policy of illuminating method
from ultimate sources by putting a sketch of the main structures of pure
consciousness before one, by systematically locating one’s work-problems in
the latter, could assist him to a further, independent advance.
The carrying out of the ﬁrst part of my plan was relatively easy, though
the unexpected length of the ﬁrst two Books of the Ideas, essential for my
purposes and undertaken by me in one piece, forced me to divide their
publication, so that the First Book alone had to sufﬁce provisionally. But
the fulﬁlment of my second aim was far harder. Anyone who knows the old
work, will see the impossibility of lifting it entirely on to the level of the
Ideas. That would mean a complete recasting of the work, and a postponement to the Greek kalends. It seemed to me, on the other hand, to be a comfortable rather than a conscientious decision, in view of the aims justifying a
new edition, to abandon all revision and merely reprint the work mechanically. Was I entitled to mislead the reader once more, through all my omissions,
waverings and self-misunderstandings, which, however unavoidable and
pardonable in the ﬁrst edition of such a work, would yet put unnecessary
difﬁculties in the way of a clear grasp of essentials?
All that remained possible was to attempt a middle course, and in a
manner to let myself go in attempting it. It meant leaving untouched certain
unclarities, and even errors, which were part and parcel of the uniﬁed style
of the work. The following maxims guided my revision:
1. To allow nothing into the new edition regarding which I was not fully
persuaded that it deserved thorough study. In this respect single errors could

Foreword

5

be left standing, since I could allow them to count as natural steps towards
a truth that would transform their good intentions. I could say to myself in
all this: Readers who stem from general philosophical drifts of the present –
which are in essence the same as those in the decade of this work’s origin –
can, like the work’s author, only at ﬁrst gain access to what are mere steps
towards certain phenomenological (logical) positions. Only when they have
gained sure mastery over the style of phenomenological research, do they
see the fundamental meaning of certain distinctions which appeared previously to be insigniﬁcant nuances.
2. To improve all that could be improved, without altering the course and
style of the old work, and, above all, to bring to most deﬁnite expression the
new thought-motives that had their ‘break-through’ in the old work, but
which had, in the ﬁrst edition, been at times sharply stressed, at times blurred,
by the hesitant and timid author.
3. To lift the reader gradually, in the course of the expositions, to a relatively rising total level of insight, following in this the original peculiarity of
the work. We must here voice the reminder that the work was a systematically bound chain of investigations but not, properly speaking, one book or
work in a literary sense. There is in it a regular ascent from a lower to a
higher level, and a working of oneself into ever new logical and phenomenological insights, which never leave the previously achieved ones quite
untouched. Ever new phenomenological strata swim into our view and add
determination to our conceptions of the earlier ones. This character of the old
work made a kind of revision seem possible, which consciously leads the
reader onward and upward, in such a way that, in the ﬁnal Investigation, the
level of the Ideas is in essentials reached, so that the previous unclearnesses
and half-truths, that we had to put up with, appear perspicuously clariﬁed.
I went ahead in the sense of these maxims, and have the impression as
regards both provisionally published pieces (the Prolegomena and the ﬁrst
part of the Second Volume) that the big efforts I made have not been wasted.
I have naturally had to add here, and strike out there, at times to rewrite
single sentences, and at times whole paragraphs and chapters. The thoughtcontent has become more packed and full in extent: the total extent of the
work, more speciﬁcally that of the Second Volume, has grown unavoidably,
despite all suppression of critical supplementation, so that this volume has
had to be divided.
Regarding the individual Investigations and their reconstructed form, the
following should be said. The Prolegomena to Pure Logic is, in its essential
content, a mere reworking of two complementary series of lectures given at
Halle in the summer and autumn of 1896. To this the greater liveliness of the
exposition is due, which has assisted its inﬂuence. The piece is, moreover,
written in one cast of thought, and I therefore thought I ought not to revise
it radically. But I found I could, on the other hand, from about the middle
on, carry out many quite large improvements in presentation, could expunge

6 Foreword

slips and put main points into sharper light. Some very essential, if partial,
insufﬁciencies – such as the concept of a ‘truth in itself’ which is too onesidedly oriented to vérités de raison – had to be left, since they were part of
the uniﬁed level of the piece. The Sixth Investigation (now the Second Part
of the Second Volume) brings in necessary clariﬁcation in this respect.
To burden the polemic on psychologism with new criticisms and countercriticisms (which would not have introduced the least new thought-motive)
did not seem very appropriate to me. I must emphasize the relation of this
piece to 1899, the precise date at which I merely rewrote it. (The printing of
the Prolegomena, minus the Foreword, was already complete in November
1899. See my self-reference in the Vierteljahrschr. f. wiss. Philosophie, 1900,
p. 512 f.) Since its appearance, some authors that I looked on as representing logical psychologism have essentially changed their position. Th. Lipps,
e.g., in his extremely signiﬁcant, original writings, has since 1902 not at all
been the man that is here quoted. Other authors have, in the meantime,
sought different foundations for their psychologistic position, a point not to
be ignored, since my presentation takes no account of it.
As regards the Second Volume of the new edition, the hesitant Introduction, so little true to the essential sense and method of the actually written
Investigations, was radically revised. I felt its defects immediately after its
appearance, and also found immediate occasion (in a review in the Archiv
f. system. Philos.  (1903), p. 397 ff.) to object to my misleading account of
phenomenology as descriptive psychology. Some of the main points of
principle are there brieﬂy but sharply characterized. The psychological description performed in inner experience appears as put on a level with the
description of external events in nature performed in external description,
but it is, on the other hand opposed to phenomenological description, from
which all transcendent interpretations of immanent data, even those of
psychical acts and states of a real ego, are entirely excluded. The descriptions
of phenomenology are said (p. 399) ‘to deal neither with lived experiences
nor classes of lived experiences of empirical persons . . . phenomenology
knows nothing of persons, of my experiences or those of others, and surmises
nothing regarding them: it raises no questions in regard to such matters,
attempts no determinations, constructs no hypotheses’. The complete reﬂective clarity that I had achieved in these and following years regarding the
essence of phenomenology, which led gradually to the systematic doctrine
of ‘phenomenological reduction’ (cf. Ideas, I, Section 2), was of use in the
rewriting of this Introduction, and also in the text of all the following Investigations, thereby raising the whole work to an essentially higher level of
clarity.
Of the ﬁve Investigations which occupy the First Part of the Second
Volume, the ﬁrst, Expression and Meaning, retains its merely preparatory
character in the new edition. It stimulates thought, it directs the gaze of the
phenomenological beginner to the initial, already most difﬁcult problems of

Foreword

7

the consciousness of meaning, without doing full justice to them. The manner
in which it deals with occasional meanings (to which, however, in strictness,
all empirical predications belong) is an act of violence – the enforced consequence of the imperfect conception of the essence of ‘truth in itself’ in the
Prolegomena.
As a further defect of this Investigation, only understood and corrected at
the end of the volume, we must note that it has no regard to the distinction
and parallelism between the ‘noetic’ and the ‘noematic’: the fundamental
role of this distinction in all ﬁelds of consciousness is ﬁrst fully laid bare in
the Ideas, but comes through in many individual arguments in the last
Investigation of the old work. For this reason, the essential ambiguity of
‘meaning’ as an Idea is not emphasized. The noetic concept of meaning is
one-sidedly stressed, though in many important passages the noematic concept is principally dealt with.
The Second Investigation concerning The Ideal Unity of the Species and
Modern Theories of Abstraction, had a style and limitation of theme, a certain
completeness, which made a few detailed amendments, but no thoroughgoing reconstructions, desirable. As before, there is no discussion of the
various types of Ideas, with their demand for a deep separation of essence,
to which naturally Ideations, as deeply and essentially separate, correspond.
All that this Investigation is concerned with, is the fact that one can learn to
see Ideas, represented, e.g. by the Idea Red, and that one can become clear
as to the essence of such ‘seeing’.
The Third Investigation On the Doctrine of Wholes and Parts has undergone very thorough revision, though in its case no unsatisfactory compromises needed to be made, and no subsequent corrections or deepenings
were necessary. All that was here needed was to assist the inner sense of
the Investigation, and what I thought were its important results, to better
operation and to remove numerous imperfections of statement. I have the
impression that this Investigation is all too little read. I myself derived great
help from it: it is also an essential presupposition for the full understanding
of the Investigations which follow.
The position of the Fourth Investigation, On the Distinction between
independent and non-independent Meanings and the Idea of Pure Grammar,
is similar to that of the Third. My position in this case is also unaltered. I
not only amended, but also in many places enriched, the content of the text,
changes which point to future publications from my lectures on logic.
The Fifth Investigation, On intentional Experiences and their ‘Contents’, had
to undergo deep-going revision. In it cardinal problems of phenomenology
(those in particular of the phenomenological doctrine of judgement) were
tackled: in these it was possible to achieve a considerably higher level of clarity
and insight without needing to alter the structure and essential content of
the Investigation. I no longer approve of the rejection of the pure ego, but
left the arguments in question in a shortened and formally improved form,

8 Foreword

as being the basis of P. Natorp’s interesting polemic in his new Allgemeine
Psychologie, volume 1, 1912. I have completely excised the much cited, very
unclear, and, in the context, quite dispensable §7, ‘Reciprocal Demarcation
of Psychology and Natural Science’. I was perhaps all too conservative in
retaining the quite unsuitable term ‘nominal presentation’: I was afraid
in general of tampering with the terminology of the old work.
The revised version of the Sixth Investigation, now in the press, is designed as the Second Part of the Second Volume: it is the most important
Investigation from a phenomenological point of view. In this case I soon
persuaded myself that it would not be enough to revise the old content,
following the original content paragraph by paragraph. Its fund of problems still were my pace-setter, but I had advanced considerably in regard
to them, and the sense of my ‘maxims’ would not permit a further use of
compromises in regard to them. I accordingly went along quite freely, and,
in order to give scientiﬁc treatment to the great themes so imperfectly dealt
with in the ﬁrst edition, I added whole series of new chapters, which increased
the bulk of this Investigation very considerably.
As in the Prolegomena I did not, in my second volume (my Fourth Investigation made a small exception) go into the many criticisms which rest, I
am sorry to say, almost exclusively on misunderstandings of the sense of my
positions. I therefore thought it more useful to discuss in universal form,
and in their historical position, the typical misunderstandings of my philosophical endeavours, and that at the end of the Second Volume, in an
epilogue, so to say. It will be a good thing if the reader has a look at this
Appendix immediately after reading the Prolegomena, so as to guard himself in time against such apparently natural misunderstandings.
A full index will be added to the work, prepared with great care by my
doctoral candidate Rudolf Clemens. I must express my heartfelt thanks for
much friendly assistance, and, in the ﬁrst place, to the Privatdozent Dr Adolf
Reinach, who helped me with his zeal and knowledge when, two years
ago, I ﬁrst went thoroughly into deliberations concerning the possibilities
of revision. The labours of correction were greatly lightened by the help of
Dr Hans Lipps and by the doctoral candidate Jean Hering.
. 
Göttingen October 1913

Prolegomena to
pure logic

HH

Volume I of the German Editions

Introduction

§1 The controversy regarding the definition of logic
and the essential content of its doctrines
‘There is accordingly as much difference of opinion in regard to the deﬁnition
of logic as there is in the treatment of the science itself. This was only to be
expected in the case of a subject, in regard to which most writers have only
employed the same words to express different thoughts’ (John Stuart Mill,
Logic, Introduction, §1). Many decades have passed since John Stuart Mill
introduced his valuable work on logic with these sentences, and important
thinkers here and beyond the Channel have devoted their best powers to logic
and have enriched its literature with ever new presentations. But even today
these sentences could serve as a suitable expression of the state of logical science,
even today we are very far from complete agreement as to the deﬁnition of
logic and the content of its essential doctrines. Contemporary logic, of course,
wears quite a different face from the logic of the mid-century. Owing particularly to the inﬂuence of the distinguished thinker just mentioned, the
ﬁrst of the three main tendencies that we ﬁnd in logic, the psychological, has
deﬁnitely come to prevail over the formal and the metaphysical tendencies, both as regards the number and the importance of its exponents. But
the other two tendencies are still carried on, and the disputed questions of
principle, reﬂected in different deﬁnitions of logic, are still disputed, while it
is still true, and perhaps more true than ever, that different writers merely
employ the same words to express different thoughts. This is not merely true
of expositions stemming from different philosophical ‘camps’. The side on
which most life is to be found, that of psychological logic, manifests unity of
conviction only in regard to the demarcation of the discipline, its essential
aims and methods. But one could scarcely be blamed for exaggerating if
one applied the phrase bellum omnium contra omnes to the doctrines put forth,
and, in particular, to the opposed interpretations of traditional formulae
and doctrines. It would be vain to seek to delimit a sum total of substantial
propositions or theories in which one might see the hard core of our epoch’s
logical science and the heritage bequeathed by it to the future.

12 Prolegomena to pure logic

§2 Necessity of a renewed discussion of questions of
principle
In this state of the science, which does not permit one to separate individual
conviction from universally binding truth, a reversion to questions of principle remains a task that must ever be tackled anew. This holds particularly
as regards the questions which play a decisive role in the dispute among
logical ‘tendencies’ and, together with this, in the dispute as to the correct
demarcation of the science. The interest in just these questions has certainly
cooled off in the last decades. After Mill’s brilliant attacks on the logic of
Hamilton, and the no less famous, but not so fruitful, logical investigations
of Trendelenburg, these questions seemed to have been fully dealt with. But
with the great resurgence of psychological studies, the psychologistic tendency in logic also gained dominance, and all effort centred in the systematic
building up of the discipline upon principles presumed valid. The fact,
however, that so many attempts made by such important thinkers to put
logic on the sure path of a science, have not led to any shattering success,
suggests that the ends in view have perhaps not been sufﬁciently clariﬁed to
allow successful investigation.
One’s conception of the aims of a science ﬁnd expression in its deﬁnition.
We naturally do not think that successful work on a discipline demands a
prior conceptual demarcation of its ﬁeld. The deﬁnitions of a science mirror
the stages of that science’s development; knowledge of the conceptual character of a science’s objects, of the boundaries and place of its ﬁeld, follow
the science and progress with it. None the less, the degree of adequacy of
such deﬁnitions, or of the views of the ﬁeld they express, react on the progress
of the science itself, and, according to the direction in which such deﬁnitions
depart from truth, such a reaction can have a slight, or a very important
inﬂuence on the development of the science. The ﬁeld of a science is an
objectively closed unity: we cannot arbitrarily delimit ﬁelds where and as we
like. The realm of truth is objectively articulated into ﬁelds: researches must
orient themselves to these objective unities and must assemble themselves
into sciences. There is a science of numbers, a science of spatial ﬁgures, of
animal species etc., but there are no special sciences of prime numbers,
of trapezia, or of lions, nor of all three taken together. Where a group of
discoveries and problems impresses us as ‘belonging together’, and leads to
the setting up of a science, inadequate demarcation can consist merely in the
fact that the ﬁeld-concept is at ﬁrst too narrow for what is given, and that
concatenations of grounding connections stretch beyond the delimited ﬁeld,
and only draw together in a closed unity over a much wider ﬁeld. Such
limitations of horizon need not be prejudicial to the ﬂourishing progress of
the science. It may be that theoretical interest ﬁnds its ﬁrst satisfaction in the
narrower ﬁeld, and that work that can be done without regard to deeper
and wider logical ramiﬁcations, is what is needed in the ﬁrst instance.

Introduction 13

There is another, much more dangerous fault in ﬁeld-delimitation: the confusion of ﬁelds, the mixture of heterogeneous things in a putative ﬁeld-unity,
especially when this rests on a complete misreading of the objects whose investigation is to be the essential aim of the proposed science. Such an unnoticed
µετbβασι ε
 dλλο γνο can have the most damaging consequences: the
setting up of invalid aims, the employment of methods wrong in principle,
not commensurate with the discipline’s true objects, the confounding of logical
levels so that the genuinely basic propositions and theories are shoved, often
in extraordinary disguises, among wholly alien lines of thought, and appear
as side-issues or incidental consequences etc. These dangers are considerable in
the philosophical sciences. Questions as to range and boundaries have, therefore, much more importance in the fruitful building up of these sciences than
in the much favoured sciences of external nature, where the course of our
experiences forces territorial separations upon us, within which successful
research can at least be provisionally established. It was Kant who uttered
the famous special words on logic which we here make our own: ‘We do not
augment, but rather subvert the sciences, if we allow their boundaries to run
together.’ The following Investigation hopes to make plain that all previous
logic, and our contemporary, psychologically based logic in particular, is
subject, almost without exception, to the above-mentioned dangers: through
its misinterpretation of theoretical principles, and the consequent confusion
of ﬁelds, progress in logical knowledge has been gravely hindered.

§3 Disputed questions. The path to be entered
The traditionally disputed questions which concern the demarcation of logic
are the following:
1. Is logic a theoretical or a practical discipline (a ‘technology’)?
2. Is it independent of other sciences, and, in particular, of psychology
and metaphysics?
3. Is it a formal discipline? Has it merely to do as usually conceived, with
the ‘form of knowledge’, or should it also take account of its matter?
4. Has it the character of an a priori, a demonstrative discipline or of an
empirical, inductive one?
All these disputed questions are so intimately bound up together, that to
take up a stance on one of them, is to some extent at least to be determined,
or factually inﬂuenced, in the stance one takes up on the others. There are
really only two parties. Logic is a theoretical discipline, formal and demonstrative, and independent of psychology: that is one view. For the other it
counts as a technology dependent on psychology, which of course excludes
the possibility of its being a formal, demonstrative discipline like the other
side’s paradigm arithmetic.
Since we do not really mean to become involved in these traditional disputes, but rather to clarify the differences of principle at work in them, and

14 Prolegomena to pure logic

to work towards a clariﬁcation of the essential aims of a pure logic, we shall
proceed as follows: we shall start from the almost universally accepted contemporary treatment of logic as a technology, and shall pin down its sense
and its justiﬁcation. This will naturally lead on to the question of the theoretical foundations of this discipline, and of its relations, in particular, to
psychology. This question coincides in essence, in the main if not entirely,
with the cardinal question of epistemology, that of the objectivity of knowledge. The outcome of our investigation of this point will be the delineation
of a new, purely theoretical science, the all-important foundation for any
technology of scientiﬁc knowledge, and itself having the character of an a
priori, purely demonstrative science. This is the science intended by Kant
and the other proponents of a ‘formal’ or ‘pure’ logic, but not rightly conceived and deﬁned by them as regards its content and scope. The ﬁnal
outcome of these discussions is a clearly circumscribed idea of the disputed
discipline’s essential content, through which a clear position in regard to the
previous mentioned controversies will have been gained.

Chapter 1

Logic as a normative and, in
particular, as a practical discipline

§4 The theoretical incompleteness of the separate
sciences
It is a common experience that the excellence of an artist’s mastery over his
material, and the decisive certainty with which he judges and assesses works
in his art, is only quite exceptionally based on a theoretical knowledge of the
rules which prescribe direction and order to his practice, and determine
the standards of value on which the perfection or imperfection of the complete
work must be assessed. Normally the practising artist is not the man who
can who can inform us rightly regarding the principles of his art. He follows
principles neither in his creation nor his evaluation. In his creation he
follows the inner activity of his harmoniously trained powers, in his judgement his ﬁnely formed artistic taste and feeling. This is not merely so in the
case of ﬁne art, of which one may ﬁrst have thought, but in that of the arts
generally, in the widest sense of the word. It therefore holds for the activities
of scientiﬁc creation and the theoretical evaluation of their results, for the
scientiﬁc demonstrations of facts, laws, theories. Even the mathematician,
the physicist and the astronomer need not understand the ultimate grounds
of their activities in order to carry through even the most important scientiﬁc performances. Although their results have a power of rational persuasion for themselves and others, yet they cannot claim to have demonstrated
all the last premisses in their syllogisms, nor to have explored the principles
on which the success of their methods reposes. The incomplete state of all
sciences depends on this fact. We do not here mean the mere incompleteness
with which the truths in a ﬁeld have been charted, but the lack of inner
clarity and rationality, which is a need independently of the expansion of
the science. Even mathematics, the most advanced of all sciences, can in this
respect claim no special position. Though often still treated as the ideal of
all science as such, how little it really is such is shown by the old, yet never
ﬁnally composed disputes as to the foundations of geometry, or as to the
justiﬁcation of the method of imaginaries. The same thinkers who sustain
marvellous mathematical methods with such incomparable mastery, and

16 Prolegomena to pure logic

who add new methods to them, often show themselves incapable of accounting satisfactorily for their logical validity and for the limits of their
right use. Though the sciences have grown great despite these defects, and
have helped us to a formerly undreamt of mastery over nature, they cannot
satisfy us theoretically. They are, as theories, not crystal-clear: the function
of all their concepts and propositions is not fully intelligible, not all of their
presuppositions have been exactly analysed, they are not in their entirety
raised above all theoretical doubt.

§5 The theoretical completion of the separate
sciences by metaphysics and theory of science
To reach this theoretical goal we ﬁrst need, as is fairly generally admitted, a
type of investigation which belongs to the metaphysical realm.
Its task is to pin down and to test the untested, for the most part not even
noticed, yet very signiﬁcant metaphysical presuppositions that underlie
at least all those sciences that are concerned with actual reality. Such presuppositions are, e.g., that an external world exists, that it is spread out in
space and time, its space being, as regards its mathematical character, threedimensional and Euclidean, and its time a one-dimensional rectilinear
manifold; that all process is subject to the causal principle etc. These presuppositions, all to be found in the framework of Aristotle’s First Philosophy, are
at present ranked under the quite unsuitable rubric of ‘epistemology’.
Such a metaphysical foundation is not, however, sufﬁcient to provide the
desired theoretical completion of the separate sciences. It concerns, moreover,
only such sciences as have to do with actual reality, which does not include
all sciences, certainly not the purely mathematical sciences whose objects are
numbers, manifolds etc., things thought of as mere bearers of ideal properties
independent of real being or non-being. The case is different in regard to another
class of investigations whose theoretical completion is plainly an indispensable
postulate in our quest for knowledge, investigations which concern all sciences
equally, since they concern, in brief, whatever makes sciences into sciences.
This names the ﬁeld of a new, and, as we shall see, complex discipline, whose
peculiarity it is to be the science of science, and which could therefore be
most pointedly called theory of science (Wissenschaftslehre).

§6 The possibility and justification of logic as
theory of science
The possibility and justiﬁcation of such a discipline – a normative and
practical discipline relating to the Idea of science – can be shown by the
following considerations.
Science is concerned, as its name indicates, with knowing, but this does
not mean that it itself consists of a sum or tissue of acts of knowing. Science

Logic as a normative and, in particular, as a practical discipline

17

exists objectively only in its literature, only in written work has it a rich
relational being limited to men and their intellectual activities: in this form it
is propagated down the millennia, and survives individuals, generations and
nations. It therefore represents a set of external arrangements, which, just as
they arose out of the knowledge-acts of many individuals, can again pass
over into just such acts of countless individuals, in a readily understandable
manner, whose exact description would require much circumlocution. For
us it is here sufﬁcient that science provides, or should provide, certain more
immediate preconditions of acts of knowing, real possibilities of knowing,
whose realization by the ‘normal’ or ‘suitably endowed’ individual in wellknown, ‘normal’ circumstances can be looked on as an attainable goal of his
endeavour. In this sense, therefore, science aims at knowledge.
In knowledge, however, we possess truth. In actual knowledge, to which
we see ourselves ultimately referred back, we possess truth as the object of a
correct judgement. But this alone is not enough, since not every correct
judgement, every afﬁrmation or rejection of a state of affairs that accords
with truth, represents knowledge of the being or non-being of this state of
affairs. Rather we may say that, if it is to be called ‘knowledge’ in the
narrowest, strictest sense, it requires to be evident, to have the luminous
certainty that what we have acknowledged is, that what we have rejected is
not, a certainty distinguished in familiar fashion from blind belief, from
vague opining, however ﬁrm and decided, if we are not to be shattered on
the rocks of extreme scepticism. Common talk does not, however, stay put
in this strict concept. We also speak, e.g. of an act of knowing where the
judgement we pass is associated with a clear memory that we previously
passed a judgement of precisely the same content accompanied with inner
evidence. This happens particularly where our memory also concerns a
demonstrative thought-process out of which this inner evidence grew, and
that we are sure we can reproduce with such evidence. (‘I know that the
Pythagorean theorem is true – I can prove it’: instead of the second half, one
can of course also say ‘but I have forgotten the proof’.)
We therefore conceive ‘knowledge’ in a wider, but not wholly loose sense:
we separate it off from baseless opinion, by pointing to some ‘mark’ of the
presumed state of affairs or for the correctness of the judgement passed by
us. The most perfect ‘mark’ of correctness is inward evidence, it counts as
an immediate intimation of truth itself. In the vast majority of cases we lack
such absolute knowledge of truth, in whose place we make use – one need
only think how memory functions in the above examples – of the inner
evidence for a higher or lower degree of probability for our state of affairs,
with which, if probability-levels become high enough, a ﬁrm judgement is
usually associated. The inward evidence of the probability of a state of
affairs A will not serve to ground the inward evidence of its truth, but it will
serve to ground those comparative, inwardly evident value-assessments,
through which, in accordance with positive or negative probability-values,

18 Prolegomena to pure logic

we can distinguish the reasonable from the unreasonable, the better-founded
from the worse-founded assumptions, opinions and surmises. Ultimately,
therefore, all genuine, and, in particular, all scientiﬁc knowledge, rests on
inner evidence: as far as such evidence extends, the concept of knowledge
extends also.
There is none the less a remaining duality in the concept of knowing or
knowledge. Knowledge in the narrowest sense of the word is the being
inwardly evident that a certain state of affairs is or is not, e.g. that S is P or
that it is not P. If it is evident that a certain state of affairs is probable to
this or that degree, then we have knowledge in the strictest sense of such a
probability, but, in regard to the being of the state of affairs itself, and not
of its probability, we only have knowledge in a wider, modiﬁed sense. It is in
this latter sense, with an eye to degrees of probability, that one speaks
of a greater or lesser degree of knowledge. Knowledge in the pregnant sense
– its being quite evident that S is P – then counts as the absolutely ﬁxed,
ideal limit which the graded probabilities for the being-P of S approach
asymptotically.
But the concept and task of science covers more than mere knowledge. If
we live through and recognize the presence of inner percepts, singly or in
groups, we have knowledge, but are far removed from science: the same
applies generally to all incoherent groups of acts of knowing. A group of
isolated bits of chemical knowledge would certainly not justify talk of a
science of chemistry. More is plainly required, i.e. systematic coherence in
the theoretical sense, which means ﬁnding grounds for one’s knowing, and
suitably combining and arranging the sequence of such groundings.
The essence of science therefore involves unity of the foundational connections: not only isolated pieces of knowledge, but their grounded validations
themselves, and together with these, the higher inter-weavings of such
validations that we call theories, must achieve systematic unity. The aim
is not merely to arrive at knowledge, but knowledge in such degree and
form as would correspond to our highest theoretical aims as perfectly as
possible.
That we look upon, and practically strive after, systematic form as the purest
embodiment of the Idea of science, does not evince some merely aesthetic
trait in our nature. Science neither wishes nor dares to become a ﬁeld for
architectonic play. The system peculiar to science, i.e. to true and correct
science, is not our own invention, but is present in things, where we simply
ﬁnd or discover it. Science seeks to be a means towards the greatest possible
conquest of the realm of truth by our knowledge. The realm of truth is,
however, no disordered chaos, but is dominated and uniﬁed by law. The
investigation and setting forth of truths must, therefore, likewise be systematic, it must reﬂect the systematic connections of those truths, and must use
the latter as a ladder to progress and penetrate from the knowledge given to,
or already gained by us to ever higher regions of the realm of truth.

Logic as a normative and, in particular, as a practical discipline

19

Science can never do without this helpful ladder. The inward evidence on
which all knowledge ultimately reposes, is no gift of nature, appearing
together with the mere idea of states of affairs without any methodically
artful set-up. People would otherwise never have thought of building up
sciences. The longueurs of method would lose their sense if to intend meant
to succeed. Why should one search into relations of entailment or construct
proofs, if one shared in truth through immediate intimation? The inward
evidence, moreover, which stamps one presented state of affairs as having
real being, or the absurdity which stamps it as having no being at all (and the
same, likewise, in regard to probability and improbability) is, in fact, only
immediately felt in the case of a relatively quite limited group of primitive
facts. Countless true propositions are only grasped by us as true when we
methodically validate them. In their case, a mere regard to our propositional
thought, will not induce inward evidence, even if it does induce judgemental
decision. Both are, however, induced, certain circumstances being normal,
where we set forth from certain known truths, and tread a certain path in
thought to our intended proposition. There may be many ways of establishing the same proposition, starting from these or those bits of knowledge. It
is, however, a characteristic and essential circumstance that there are inﬁnitely many truths which could never be transformed into knowledge without such methodical procedures.
That this is the case, that we need grounded validations in order to pass
beyond what, in knowledge, is immediately and therefore trivially evident,
not only makes the sciences possible and necessary, but with these also a
theory of science, a logic. All sciences proceed methodically in the pursuit of
truth, employ more or less artiﬁcial aids in order to bring to knowledge
truths or probabilities that would otherwise remain hidden, and in order to
use the obvious or the already established as a lever for achieving what is
remote and only mediately attainable. The comparative treatment of these
methodical aids, in which the insights and experiences of countless generations of thinkers are stored up, should provide the means for setting up
general norms for such procedures and likewise rules for their inventive
construction in various classes of cases.

§10 The ideas of theory and science as problems of
the theory of science
Something more must be added. The theory of science, as here shown up, is
not merely concerned to investigate the forms and laws of isolated validations,
and the auxiliary devices which go with these. Isolated validations also occur
beyond the boundaries of science: clearly, therefore, isolated validations
– and loosely piled heaps of such validations – do not make up science.
Science requires, as said above, a certain unity of validatory interconnection, a certain unity in the stepwise ascent of its validatory arguments, and

20 Prolegomena to pure logic

this form of unity has itself a lofty teleological meaning in the attainment of
the highest goal of knowledge for which all science strives: to advance as far
as possible in the research into truth, i.e. not in the research into separate
truths, but into the realm of truth or its natural provinces.
The task of the theory of science will therefore also be to deal with the sciences as systematic unities of this or that sort in other words, with the formal
features that stamp them as sciences, with the features that determine their
mutual boundaries and their inner articulation into ﬁelds, into relatively
closed theories, with the features which ﬁx their essentially different species
or forms etc.
This systematic tissue of validatory arguments can in fact be subordinated
to the concept of method, so that science’s task is not merely to deal with
the methods of knowledge in the sciences, but also with such methods as are
themselves styled sciences. Its task is not merely to separate off valid from
invalid demonstrations, but also valid from invalid theories and sciences.
The task thus assigned it is plainly not independent of the one previously
mentioned, but to a considerable extent presupposes a prior carrying out of
the former. Research into the sciences as systematic unities is unthinkable
without prior research into their validatory procedures. Both at least enter
into the notion of a science of science as such.

§11 Logic or theory of science as normative discipline
and as technology
From our discussions up to this point logic – in the sense of the theory of
science here in question – emerges as a normative discipline. Sciences are
creations of the spirit which are directed to a certain end, and which are
for that reason to be judged in accordance with that end. The same holds
of theories, validations and in short of everything that we call a ‘method’.
Whether a science is truly a science, or a method a method, depends on
whether it accords with the aims that it strives for. Logic seeks to search
into what pertains to genuine, valid science as such, what constitutes the
Idea of Science, so as to be able to use the latter to measure the empirically
given sciences as to their agreement with their Idea, the degree to which they
approach it, and where they offend against it. In this logic shows itself to be
a normative science, and separates itself off from the comparative mode of
treatment which tries to conceive of the sciences, according to their typical
communities and peculiarities, as concrete cultural products of their era,
and to explain them through the relationships which obtain in their time.
For it is of the essence of a normative science that it establishes general
propositions in which, with an eye to a normative standard, an Idea or
highest goal, certain features are mentioned whose possession guarantees
conformity to that standard, or sets forth an indispensable condition of the
latter. A normative science also establishes cognate propositions in which

Logic as a normative and, in particular, as a practical discipline

21

the case of non-conformity is considered or the absence of such states of
affairs is pronounced. Not as if one had to state general marks in order to
say what an object should be to conform to its basic norm: a normative
discipline never sets forth universal criteria, any more than a therapy states
universal symptoms. Special criteria are what the theory of science particularly gives us, and what it alone can give us. If it maintains that, having
regard to the supreme aim of the sciences and the human mind’s actual
constitution, and whatever else may be invoked, such and such methods
M1, M2 . . . arise, it states general propositions of the form: ‘Every group of
mental activities of the sorts AB . . . which realize the combinatory form M1
(or M2 . . . ) yield a case of correct method’, or, what amounts to the same
‘Every (soi-disant) methodical procedure of the form M1 (or M2 . . . ) is a
correct one.’ If one could really formulate all intrinsically possible valid
propositions of this and like sort, our normative science would certainly
possess a measuring rod for every pretended method, but then also only in
the form of special criteria.
Where the basic norm is an end or can become an end, the normative
discipline by a ready extension of its task gives rise to a technology. This
occurs in this case too. If the theory of science sets itself the further task of
investigating such conditions as are subject to our power, on which the
realization of valid methods depends, and if it draws up rules for our procedure in the methodical tracking down of truth, in the valid demarcation
and construction of the sciences, in the discovery and use, in particular,
of the many methods that advance such sciences, and in the avoidance of
errors in all of these concerns, then it has become a technology of science.
This last plainly includes the whole normative theory of science, and it is
therefore wholly appropriate, in view of the unquestionable value of such a
technology, that the concept of logic should be correspondingly widened,
and should be deﬁned in its sense.

§12 Relevant definitions of logic
The deﬁnition of logic as a technology was much favoured by tradition, but
closer determinations of it left much to be desired. Deﬁnitions such as ‘technology of judgement, of reasoning, of knowing, of thinking’ (l’art de penser)
are misleading, and in any case too narrow. If we restrict the vague meaning
of the word ‘thinking’ in the last-mentioned deﬁnition (in use to this day) to
the concept of correct judgement, our deﬁnition reads: ‘the technology of
correct judgement’. But that this deﬁnition is too narrow is plain from the
fact that the aim of scientiﬁc knowledge does not follow from it. If one says
that ‘the aim of thinking is ﬁrst perfectly fulﬁlled in science’, this is without doubt right, but it concedes that not thought or knowledge is really the
end of the technology in question, but that towards which thought itself is a
means.

22 Prolegomena to pure logic

Other deﬁnitions are open to similar objections. They are open to the
objection recently revived by Bergmann that the technology of an activity,
e.g. painting, singing, riding, would be expected above all ‘to show what one
must do to perform the relevant activity correctly, e.g. how one must hold
and wield the brush in painting, how one must use the chest, throat and
mouth in singing, how one must pull and relax the reins in riding and press
with one’s legs’. This would admit into the ﬁeld of logic doctrines wholly
alien to it.1
Schleiermacher’s deﬁnition of logic as the technology of scientiﬁc knowledge certainly comes closer to the truth. For obviously in a discipline so
deﬁned one would have to consider only what is peculiar to scientiﬁc knowledge, and to probe its possible demands: the further preconditions which
in general favour the emergence of knowledge would be left to pedagogy,
hygiene etc. But Schleiermacher’s deﬁnition does not plainly say that this
technology should also set up rules for the demarcation and construction
of the sciences, whereas this aim, on the other hand, includes the aim of scientiﬁc knowledge. Excellent thoughts towards the circumscription of our
discipline are to be found in Bolzano’s Wissenschaftslehre, but rather in his
preliminary critical searchings than in the deﬁnition he himself espouses.
This last sounds oddly enough: the theory of science (or logic) is ‘the science
which shows us how to present the sciences in convenient textbooks’.2

disciplines as the foundation of normative disciplines
Chapter Theoretical
2

23

Theoretical disciplines as the
foundation of normative disciplines

§14 The concept of a normative science. The basic
standard or principle that gives it unity
We begin by concentrating on a proposition that is of decisive importance
for our further investigation: that every normative and likewise every practical discipline rests on one or more theoretical disciplines, inasmuch as its
rules must have a theoretical content separable from the notion of normativity
(of the ‘shall’ or ‘should’), whose scientiﬁc investigation is the duty of these
theoretical disciplines.
To clear up this point, let us ﬁrst discuss the concept of a normative science
in its relation to that of a theoretical science. The laws of the former tell us
(it is usually held) what shall or should be, though perhaps, under the actual
circumstances, it neither is nor can be. The laws of the latter, contrariwise,
merely tell us what is. We must now ask what is meant by such a ‘shall be’
or ‘should be’ as opposed to what is.
The original sense of ‘shall’ or ‘should’, which relates to a certain wish or
will, a certain demand or command, is plainly too narrow, e.g. You shall
listen to me, X shall come to me. As we speak in a wider sense of a demand,
where there is no one who demands, and perhaps no one on whom demand
is made, so we frequently speak of a ‘shall’ or a ‘should’ which is independent of anyone’s wishing or willing. If we say ‘A soldier should be brave’, this
does not mean that we or anyone else are wishing or willing, commanding
or requiring this. One might rather suppose that a corresponding wishing
and requiring would be generally justiﬁed, i.e. in relation to every soldier,
though even this is not quite right, since it is surely not necessary that we
should here be really evaluating a wish or a demand. ‘A soldier should be
brave’ rather means that only a brave soldier is a ‘good’ soldier, which
implies (since the predicates ‘good’ and ‘bad’ divide up the extension of the
concept ‘soldier’) that a soldier who is not brave is a ‘bad’ soldier. Since this
value-judgement holds, everyone is entitled to demand of a soldier that he
should be brave, the same ground ensures that it is desirable, praiseworthy

24 Prolegomena to pure logic

etc., that he should be brave. The same holds in other instances. ‘A man
should practise neighbourly love’, i.e. one who omits this is no longer a
‘good’ man, and therefore eo ipso is (in this respect) a ‘bad’ man. ‘A drama
should not break up into episodes’ – otherwise it is not a ‘good’ drama, not
a ‘true’ work of art. In all these cases we make our positive evaluation, the
attribution of a positive value-predicate, depend on a condition to be fulﬁlled, whose non-fulﬁlment entails the corresponding negative predicate.
We may in general, take as identical or at least as equivalent the forms
‘An A should be B’ and ‘An A that is not B is a bad A’, or ‘Only an A which
is a B is a good A’.
The term ‘good’ naturally functions in the widest sense of what is in any
way valuable: in the concrete propositions ranged under our formula it is to
be understood in the speciﬁc sense of the valuations it presupposes, e.g. as
useful, beautiful, moral etc. There are as many ways of speaking of a ‘should’
as there are different species of valuations, as there are, in consequence,
actual or presumed values.
Negative statements of what should not be are not to be taken as negations
of the corresponding afﬁrmative statements, as, too, in the ordinary sense,
the denial of a demand does not amount to a prohibition. ‘A soldier should
not be cowardly’ does not mean that it is false that a soldier should be
cowardly, but that a cowardly soldier also is a bad one. The following forms
are therefore equivalent: ‘An A should not be B’, and ‘An A which is B is in
general a bad A’ or ‘Only an A which is not B is a good A’.
That ‘should’ and ‘should not’ are mutually exclusive follows formally
from their interpretations, and the same holds of the proposition that
judgements regarding what should be entail no assertion regarding what
correspondingly is.
The just clariﬁed judgements of normative form are plainly not the only
ones that one would allow to count as such, even if the word ‘should’ or
‘shall’ does not occur in their expression. It is inessential if, instead of saying
‘A should (or should not) be B’ we also are able to say ‘A must (or may not)
be B’. We touch more substance if we point to the two new formulae ‘A
need not be B’ and ‘A may be B’, which are in contradictory opposition to
the above forms. ‘May not’ is therefore the negation of ‘should’, or, what is
the same, of ‘must’; ‘may’ the negation of ‘should not’ or, what is the same,
of ‘may not’, as can readily be seen from the interpreting value-judgements:
‘An A need not be B’ = ‘An A that is not B is not therefore a bad A’; ‘An A
may be B’ = ‘An A that is B is not therefore a bad A’.
There are yet other propositions that must be reckoned with here, e.g.
‘For an A to be a good A it sufﬁces (or does not sufﬁce) that it is B’.
Whereas our former propositions are about certain necessary conditions for
attributing or denying positive or negative value-predicates, our concern in
the present proposition is with sufﬁcient conditions. Other further propositions aim at stating what are at once necessary and sufﬁcient conditions.

Theoretical disciplines as the foundation of normative disciplines

25

We have thus run through the essential forms of general normative propositions. To them of course correspond forms of particular and singular
value-judgement which contribute nothing of importance to our analysis,
and of which the latter at least do not count for our purposes. They have
always a nearer or remoter relation to certain normative generalities: in
abstract normative disciplines, they can only occur in relation to their governing generalities. Such disciplines are as such located beyond all individual existence, their generalities are ‘purely conceptual’, they have a lawlike
character in the strict sense of the word ‘law’.
We see from these analyses that each normative proposition presupposes
a certain sort of valuation or approval through which the concept of a ‘good’
or ‘bad’ (a value or a disvalue) arises in connection with a certain class of
objects: in conformity with this, objects divide into good and bad ones. To
be able to pass the normative judgement ‘A soldier should be brave’, I must
have some conception of a ‘good’ soldier, and this concept cannot be founded
on an arbitrary nominal deﬁnition, but on a general valuation, which permits
us to value soldiers as good or bad according to these or those properties.
Whether or not this valuation is in any sense ‘objectively valid’, whether we
can draw any distinction between the subjectively and objectively ‘good’,
does not enter into our determination of the sense of should-propositions. It
is sufﬁcient that something is held valuable, that an intention is effected
having the content that something is valuable or good.
If, conversely, a pair of value-predicates has been laid down for an appropriate class, following upon a certain general valuation, then the possibility
of normative judgements is given: all forms of normative proposition have
then deﬁnite sense. Every constitutive property B of the ‘good’ A yields, e.g.
a proposition of the form ‘An A should be B’, every property incompatible
with B, a proposition ‘An A may not (should not) be B’ etc.
Finally, as regards the concept of the normative judgement we can, following our analysis, describe it as follows: In relation to a general underlying
valuation, and the content of the corresponding pair of value-predicates
determined by it, every proposition is said to be ‘normative’ that states a
necessary, or a sufﬁcient, or a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for having
such a predicate. If we have once drawn a distinction between ‘good’ and
‘bad’ in our valuations in a particular sense, and so in a particular sphere,
we are naturally concerned to decide the circumstances, the inner or outer
properties that are or are not guarantees that a thing is good or bad in this
sense: what properties may not be lacking if an object from that sphere is to
be accorded the value of ‘good’.
Where we speak of good and bad, we also usually make comparative
valuational distinctions between better and best or between worse and worst.
If pleasure is our good, then the more intense, and again the more enduring,
pleasure is better. If knowledge counts as our good, not every piece of
knowledge will therefore count as ‘equally good’. We value the knowledge

26 Prolegomena to pure logic

of laws more highly than the knowledge of singular facts: the knowledge of
more general laws, e.g. ‘Every equation of the nth degree has n roots’, more
highly than the knowledge of the special laws that fall under them – ‘Every
equation of the fourth degree has four roots’. There are therefore normative
questions relating to relative value-predicates just as there are in the case
of absolute value-predicates. If the constitutive content of what is to be
esteemed good or bad is ﬁxed, one must ask what, in comparative valuation,
will count constitutively as better or worse, and, further, what are the nearer
and the more remote, the necessary and the sufﬁcient conditions for the
relative predicates, laying down the content of the better and worse, and
ultimately of the relatively best. The constitutive contents of positive and
relative value-predicates are, so to say, the metric units in terms of which
objects of the relevant sphere are measured.
The sum total of these norms plainly forms a closed group, determined by
our fundamental valuation. The normative proposition which demands
generally of the objects of a sphere that they should measure up to the
constitutive features of the positive value-predicate to the greatest extent
possible, has a central place in each group of mutually coherent norms, and
can be called their basic norm. This role is, e.g., played by the categorical
imperative in the group of normative propositions which make up Kant’s
Ethics, as by the principle of the ‘greatest possible happiness of the greatest
possible number’ in the Ethics of the Utilitarians.
The basic norm is the correlate of the deﬁnition of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ in
the sense in question. It tells us on what basic standard or basic value all
normativization must be conducted, and does not therefore represent a
normative proposition in the strict sense. The relationship of the basic norm
to what are, properly speaking, normative propositions, is like the relation
between so-called deﬁnitions of the number-series and the arithmetical
theorems about the relations of numbers which are always referred back to
these. The basic norm could also be called a ‘deﬁnition’ of the standard conception of good – e.g. of the morally good – but this would mean departing
from the ordinary logical concept of deﬁnition.
If, in relation to such a ‘deﬁnition’, or fundamental and universal valuation, we make it our aim to conduct scientiﬁc researches into a sum total
of mutually relevant normative propositions, we come upon the Idea of a
Normative Discipline. Each such discipline is therefore unambiguously
characterized by its basic norm, or by the deﬁnition of what shall count as
‘good’ in such a discipline. If, e.g. the production, maintenance, increase and
intensiﬁcation of pleasure counts as our good, we shall ask by what objects,
or in what subjective and objective circumstances, pleasure is excited. We
shall enquire generally into the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for the
emergence, maintenance, increase etc., of pleasure. These questions taken as
targets for our scientiﬁc discipline yield a hedonic: this hedonic is normative
ethics in the sense of the hedonists. The valuation directed to the arousal of

Theoretical disciplines as the foundation of normative disciplines

27

pleasure yields the basic norm which determines the unity of the discipline
and distinguishes it from every other normative discipline. Every normative
discipline therefore has its own basic norm which is in each case its unifying
principle. Theoretical disciplines do not have this central reference of all
researches to a fundamental valuation as the source of a dominant normative interest. The unity of their researches, and the coordination of what
they know, is determined exclusively by a theoretical interest directed to
investigating matters that really belong together theoretically, in virtue of
the inner laws of things, and which must therefore be investigated together
in their mutual coherence.

§15 Normative disciplines and technologies
A normative interest is naturally dominant in the case of real (realen) objects,
as the objects of practical valuations. Hence the undeniable tendency to
identify the notion of a normative discipline with that of a practical discipline or a technology. It is easy to see, however, that such an identiﬁcation
cannot be sustained. Schopenhauer, e.g., who is led by his doctrine of inborn character to reject in principle all practical moralizing, has an ethics in
the sense of a normative science, which he himself works out. For he does
not at all abandon distinctions in moral value. A technology represents a
particular case of a normative discipline which arises when the basic norm
consists in achieving a universal practical aim. Plainly, therefore, every technology includes in itself an entire normative discipline, which is not itself a
practical discipline. For its task presupposes that, altogether apart from
everything relating to practical attainment, the narrower task of ﬁxing norms
has ﬁrst been carried out, norms by which we can assess the adequacy to the
general notion of the end to be achieved, or the possession of the properties
characteristic of the class of values in question. Every normative discipline,
conversely, whose fundamental valuation is transformed into a corresponding teleological prescription, widens out into a technology.

§16 Theoretical disciplines as the foundation of
normative disciplines
It is now easy to see that each normative, and, a fortiori, each practical
discipline, presupposes one or more theoretical disciplines as its foundations, in the sense, namely, that it must have a theoretical content free from
all normativity, which as such has its natural location in certain theoretical
sciences, whether these are already marked off or yet to be constituted.
The basic norm (or basic value, or ultimate end) determines, we saw, the
unity of the discipline: it also is what imports the thought of normativity
into all its normative propositions. But alongside of this general thought of
measurement in terms of a basic norm, these propositions have their own

28 Prolegomena to pure logic

theoretical content, which differs from one case to another. Each expresses
the thought of a measuring relation between norm and what it is a norm for,
but this relation is itself objectively characterized – if we abstract from
valuational interest – as a relation between condition and conditioned, which
relation is set down as existent or non-existent in the relevant normative
propositions. Every normative proposition of, e.g., the form ‘An A should
be B’ implies the theoretical proposition ‘Only an A which is B has the
properties C’, in which ‘C’ serves to indicate the constitutive content of the
standard-setting predicate ‘good’ (e.g. pleasure, knowledge, whatever, in
short, is marked down as good by the valuation fundamental to our given
sphere). The new proposition is purely theoretical: it contains no trace of
the thought of normativity. If, conversely, a proposition of the latter form is
true, and thereupon a novel valuation of a C as such emerges, and makes a
normative relation to the proposition seem requisite, the theoretical proposition assumes the normative form ‘Only an A which is B is a good A’, i.e.
‘An A should be B’. Normative propositions can therefore make an appearance even in theoretical contexts: our theoretical interest in such contexts
attaches value to the being of a state of affairs of a sort – to the equilateral
form, e.g., of a triangle about to be determined – and then assesses other
states of affairs, e.g. one of equiangularity, in relation to this: If the triangle
is to be equilateral, it must be equiangular. Such a modiﬁcation is, however,
merely passing and secondary in theoretical sciences, since our last intention
is here directed to the theoretical coherence of the things themselves. Enduring results are not therefore stated in normative form, but in the forms of
this objective coherence, in the form, that is, of a general proposition.
It is now clear that the theoretical relations which our discussion has
shown to lie hidden in the propositions of normative sciences, must have
their logical place in certain theoretical sciences. If the normative science is
to deserve its name, if it is to do scientiﬁc work on the relations of the facts
to be normatively considered to their basic norms, it must study the content
of the theoretical nucleus of these relations, and this means entering the
spheres of the relevant theoretical sciences. In other words: Every normative
discipline demands that we know certain non-normative truths: these it takes
from certain theoretical sciences, or gets by applying propositions so taken
to the constellation of cases determined by its normative interest. This
naturally holds, likewise, in the more special case of a technology, and plainly
to a greater extent. The theoretical knowledge is there added which will
provide a basis for a fruitful realization of ends and means.
One point should be noted in the interest of what follows. Naturally these
theoretical sciences may share in very different degrees in the scientiﬁc foundation and elaboration of the normative discipline in question. Their signiﬁcance for it can also be greater or less. It may become plain that, to satisfy
the interests of a normative discipline, the knowledge of certain sorts of
theoretical connection has a prime urgency, and that the development and

Theoretical disciplines as the foundation of normative disciplines

29

bringing closer of the theoretical ﬁeld of knowledge to which they belong
therefore plays a decisive part in making such a normative discipline possible. In building up such a discipline, it may be that certain sorts of theoretical
knowledge play a useful and perhaps very weighty role, but none the less are
of secondary signiﬁcance, since their removal would only narrow, but not
wholly destroy, the ﬁeld of the discipline. One may think, e.g., of the relation between merely normative and practical ethics (see above, §15). All the
propositions which have to do with making practical realization possible, do
not effect the sphere of the pure norms of ethical valuation. If these norms,
or the theoretical knowledge underlying them, were to fall away, ethics
would vanish altogether. If the former propositions were to drop out, there
would be no possibility of ethical practice (or no possibility of a technology
of ethical conduct).
It is in relation to such distinctions that talk of the essential foundations
of a normative science must be understood. We mean thereby the theoretical sciences that are absolutely essential to its construction, perhaps also the
relevant groups of theoretical propositions which are of decisive importance
in making the normative discipline possible.

30 Prolegomena
Chapter
3 to pure logic

Psychologism, its arguments
and its attitude to the usual
counter-arguments

§17 The disputed question as to whether the essential
theoretical foundations of normative logic lie in
psychology
If we now apply the general results arrived at in the last chapter to logic as a
normative discipline, a ﬁrst, very weighty question arises: Which theoretical
sciences provide the essential foundations of the theory of science? And to this
we forthwith add the further question: Is it correct that the theoretical truths
we ﬁnd dealt with in the framework of traditional and modern logic, and above
all those belonging to its essential foundations, have their theoretical place in
the sciences that have been already marked off and independently developed?
Here we encounter the disputed question as to the relation between
psychology and logic, since one dominant tendency of our time has a ready
answer to the questions raised: The essential theoretical foundations of logic
lie in psychology, in whose ﬁeld those propositions belong – as far as their
theoretical content is concerned – which give logic its characteristic pattern.
Logic is related to psychology just as any branch of chemical technology is
related to chemistry, as land-surveying is to geometry etc. This tendency
sees no need to mark off a new theoretical discipline, and, in particular, not
one that would deserve the name of logic in a narrower and more pointed
sense. Often people talk as if psychology provided the sole, sufﬁcient,
theoretical foundation for logical technology. So we read in Mill’s polemic
against Hamilton: ‘Logic is not a science separate from and coordinate with
psychology. To the extent that it is a science at all, it is a part or branch
of psychology, distinguished from it on the one hand as the part is from the
whole, and on the other hand as the art is from the science. It owes all its
theoretical foundations to psychology, and includes as much of that science
as is necessary to establish the rules of the art’ (An Examination of Sir
William Hamilton’s Philosophy, p. 461). According to Lipps it even seems
that logic is to be ranked as a mere constituent of psychology for he says:
‘The fact that logic is a speciﬁc discipline of psychology distinguishes them
satisfactorily from one another’ (Lipps, Grundzüge der Logik (1893), §3).

Psychologism, its arguments and its attitude to the usual counter-arguments

31

§18 The line of proof of the psychologistic thinkers 1
If we ask for the justiﬁcation of such views, a most plausible line of argument is offered, which seems to cut off all further dispute ab initio. However
one may deﬁne logic as a technology – as a technology of thinking, judging,
inferring, knowing, proving, of the courses followed by the understanding in
the pursuit of truth, in the evaluation of grounds of proof etc. – we ﬁnd
invariably that mental activities or products are the objects of practical
regulation. And just as, in general, the artiﬁcial working over of a material
presupposes the knowledge of its properties, so this will be the case here too,
where we are specially concerned with psychological material. The scientiﬁc
investigation of the rules according to which this stuff should be worked
over, naturally leads back to the scientiﬁc investigation of these properties.
Psychology therefore provides the theoretical basis for constructing a logical
technology, and, more particularly, the psychology of cognition.2
Any glance at the contents of logical literature will conﬁrm this. What is
being talked of throughout? Concepts, judgements, syllogisms, deductions,
inductions, deﬁnitions, classiﬁcations etc. – all psychology, except that they
are selected and arranged from normative and practical points of view.
Draw the bounds of pure logic as tightly as one likes, it will not be possible to
keep out what is psychological. This is implicit in the concepts constitutive
for logical laws: truth and falsehood, afﬁrmation and negation, universality
and particularity, ground and consequent etc.

§19 The usual arguments of the opposition and the
psychologistic rejoinder
Remarkably enough, the opposition believes that it can base a sharp separation of the two disciplines on precisely the normative character of logic.
Psychology, it is said, deals with thinking as it is, logic with thinking as it
should be. The former has to do with the natural laws, the latter with the
normative laws of thinking. It reads in this sense in Jäsche’s version of
Kant’s Lectures on Logic: ‘Some logicians presuppose psychological principles for logic, but to introduce such principles into logic, is as absurd as to
derive morality from Life. If we take principles from psychology, i.e. from
observations of our understanding, we shall only see how thought proceeds,
and what happens under manifold subjective hindrances and conditions.
Those would only lead to a knowledge of merely contingent laws. Logic
does not however ask after contingent, but after necessary laws – not how
we think but how we ought to think. The rules of logic must therefore be
taken, not from the contingent, but from the necessary use of reason, which
one ﬁnds in oneself apart from all psychology. In logic we do not wish to
know what the understanding is like and how it thinks, nor how it has
hitherto proceeded in its thinking, but how it ought to proceed in its thinking.

32 Prolegomena to pure logic

It should teach us the correct use of the understanding, the use in which it
is consistent with itself’ (Introduction, I. Concept of Logic. Kant’s Werke,
ed. Hartenstein, 1867, , p. 14). Herbart takes up a similar position when
he objects to the logic of his time and ‘the would be psychological stories
about understanding and reason with which it starts’, by saying that this is
as badly in error as a moral theory which tried to begin with the natural
history of human tendencies, urges and weaknesses, and by pointing to
the normative character of logic as of ethics (Herbart, Psychologie als
Wissenschaft, , §119, original ed. , p. 173).
Such arguments do not dismay the psychologistic logicians. They answer:
A necessary use of the understanding is none the less a use of the understanding, and belongs, with the understanding itself, to psychology. Thinking as it should be, is merely a special case of thinking as it is. Psychology
must certainly investigate the natural laws of thinking, the laws which hold
for all judgements whatever, whether correct or false. It would, however, be
absurd to interpret this proposition as if such laws only were psychological
as applied with the most embracing generality to all judgements whatever,
whereas special laws of judgement, like the laws of correct judgement, were
shut out from its purview. (Cf., e.g. Mill, An Examination, p. 459 f.) Or does
one hold a different opinion? Can one deny that the normative laws of
thinking have the character of such special laws? This also will not do.
Normative laws of thought, it is said, only try to say how one must proceed
provided one wants to think correctly. ‘We think correctly, in the material
sense, when we think of things as they are. But for us to say, certainly and
indubitably, that things are like this or like that, means that the nature of
our mind prevents us from thinking of them otherwise. For one need not
repeat what has been so often uttered, that one can obviously not think of a
thing as it is, without regard to the way in which one must think of it, nor
can one make of it so isolated an object of knowledge. The man, therefore,
who compares his thought of things with the things themselves can in fact only
measure his contingent thinking, inﬂuenced by custom, tradition, inclination and aversion, against a thinking that is free from such inﬂuences, and
that heeds no voice but that of its own inherent lawfulness.’
‘The rules, therefore, on which one must proceed in order to think rightly
are merely rules on which one must proceed in order to think as the nature
of thought, its speciﬁc lawfulness, demands. They are, in short, identical
with the natural laws of thinking itself. Logic is a physics of thinking or it is
nothing at all.’ (Lipps, ‘Die Aufgabe der Erkenntnistheorie’, Philos. Monatshefte,  (1880), p. 530 f.)
It may perhaps be said from the antipsychologistic side:3 Of course the
various kinds of presentations, judgements, syllogisms etc., also have a place
in psychology as mental phenomena and dispositions, but psychology has
a different task in regard to them than logic. Both investigate the laws of
these activities, but ‘law’ means something quite different in the two cases.

Psychologism, its arguments and its attitude to the usual counter-arguments

33

The task of psychology is to investigate the laws governing the real connections of mental events with one another, as well as with related mental
dispositions and corresponding events in the bodily organism. ‘Law’ here
means a comprehensive formula covering coexistent and successive connections that are without exception and necessary. Such connections are causal.
The task of logic is quite different. It does not enquire into the causal origins
or consequences of intellectual activities, but into their truth-content: it
enquires what such activities should be like, or how they should proceed, in
order that the resultant judgements should be true. Correct judgements and
false ones, evident ones and blind ones, come and go according to natural
laws, they have causal antecedents and consequences like all mental phenomena. Such natural connections do not, however, interest the logician; he
looks rather for ideal connections that he does not always ﬁnd realized, in
fact only exceptionally ﬁnds realized in the actual course of thoughts. He
aims not at a physics, but an ethics of thinking. Sigwart therefore rightly
stresses the point that, in the psychological treatment of thought, ‘the
opposition of true and false has as little part to play as the opposition of
good or bad in human conduct is a psychological matter’.4
We cannot be content – such will be the psychologistic rejoinder – with
such half-truths. The task of logic is of course quite different from that of
psychology: who would deny it? It is a technology of knowledge, but how
could such a technology ignore questions of causal connection, how could
it look for ideal connections without studying natural ones? ‘As if every
“ought” did not rest on an “is”, every ethics did not also have to show itself
a physics.’ (Lipps, ‘Die Aufgabe der Erkenntnistheorie’, op. cit. p. 529.) ‘A
question as to what should be done always reduces to a question as to what
must be done if a deﬁnite goal is to be reached, and this question in its turn
is equivalent to a question as to how this goal is in fact reached’ (Lipps,
Grundzüge der Logik, §1). That psychology, as distinct from logic, does not
deal with the opposition of true and false ‘does not mean that psychology
treats these different mental conditions on a like footing, but that it renders
both intelligible in a like manner’ (Lipps, op. cit. §3, p. 2). Theoretically
regarded, Logic therefore is related to psychology as a part to a whole. Its
main aim is, in particular, to set up propositions of the form: Our intellectual activities must, either generally, or in speciﬁcally characterized circumstances, have such and such a form, such and such an arrangement, such
and such combinations and no others, if the resultant judgements are to
have the character of evidence, are to achieve knowledge in the pointed
sense of the word. Here we have an obvious causal relation. The psychological character of evidence is a causal consequence of certain antecedents.
What sort of antecedents? This is just what we have to explore.5
The following often repeated argument is no more successful in shaking
the psychologistic ranks: Logic, it is said, can as little rest on psychology as
on any other science; since each science is only a science in virtue of its

34 Prolegomena to pure logic

harmony with logical rules, it presupposes the validity of these rules. It would
therefore be circular to try to give logic a ﬁrst foundation in psychology.6
The opposition will reply: That this argument cannot be right, is shown
by the fact that it would prove the impossibility of all logic. Since logic itself
must proceed logically, it would itself commit the same circle, would itself
have to establish the validity of rules that it presupposes.
Let us, however, consider more closely what such a circle could consist in.
Could it mean that psychology presupposes the validity of logical laws?
Here one must notice the equivocation in the notion of ‘presupposing’. That
a science presupposes the validity of certain rules may mean that they serve
as premisses in its proofs: it may also mean that they are rules in accordance
with which the science must proceed in order to be a science at all. Both are
confounded in our argument for which reasoning according to logical rules,
and reasoning from logical rules, count as identical. There would only be a
circle if the reasoning were from such rules. But, as many an artist creates
beautiful works without the slightest knowledge of aesthetics, so an investigation may construct proofs without ever having recourse to logic. Logical
laws cannot therefore have been premisses in such proofs. And what is true
of single proofs is likewise true of whole sciences.

§20 A gap in the psychologistic line of proof
In these and similar arguments the anti-psychologistic party seem undoubtedly to have got the worst of it. Many think the battle quite at an end, they
regard the rejoinders of the psychologistic party as completely victorious.
One thing only might arouse our philosophical wonder, that there was and
is such a battle at all, that the same arguments have repeatedly been adduced
while their refutations have not been acknowledged as cogent. If everything
really were so plain and clear as the psychologistic trend assures us, the
matter would not be readily understandable, since there are unprejudiced,
serious and penetrating thinkers on the opposite side as well. Is this not
again a case where the truth lies in the middle? Has each of the parties not
recognized a valid portion of the truth, and only shown incapacity for its
sharp conceptual circumscription, and not even seen that they only had part
of the whole? Is there not perhaps an unresolved residuum in the arguments
of the anti-psychologists – despite much unclearness and error in detail which
has made refutation easy; are they not informed by a true power, which
always re-emerges in unbiased discussion? I for my part would answer ‘Yes’.
It seems to me that the greater weight of truth lies on the anti-psychologistic
side, but that its key-thoughts have not been properly worked out, and are
blemished by many mistakes.
Let us go back to the question we raised above regarding the essential
foundations of normative logic. Have the arguments of psychologistic thinkers
really settled this? Here a weak point at once appears. The argument only

Psychologism, its arguments and its attitude to the usual counter-arguments

35

proves one thing, that psychology helps in the foundation of logic, not that
it has the only or the main part in this, not that it provides logic’s essential
foundation in the sense above deﬁned (§16). The possibility remains open
that another science contributes to its foundation, perhaps in a much more
important fashion. Here may be the place for the ‘pure logic’ which on the
other party’s view, has an existence independent of all psychology, and is a
naturally bounded, internally closed-off science. We readily grant that what
Kantians and Herbartians have produced under this rubric does not quite
accord with the character that our suggested supposition would give it. For
they always talk of normative laws of thinking and particularly of conceptformation, judgement-framing etc. Proof enough, one might say, that their
subject-matter is neither theoretical nor wholly unpsychological. But this
objection would lose weight if closer investigation conﬁrmed the surmise
suggested to us above in §13 (excised from this edition), that these schools
were unlucky in deﬁning and building up the intended discipline, yet none
the less approached it closely, in so far as they discerned an abundance of
interconnected theoretical truths in traditional logic, which did not ﬁt into
psychology, nor into any other separate science, and so permitted one to
divine the existence of a peculiar realm of truth. And if these were the truths
to which all logical regulation in the last resort related, truths mainly to be
thought of when ‘logical truths’ were in question, one could readily come
to see in them what was essential to the whole of logic, and to give the name
of ‘pure logic’ to their theoretical unity. That this hits off the true state of
things I hope actually to prove.

36
Prolegomena
Chapter
4 to pure logic

Empiricistic consequences of
psychologism

§22 The laws of thought as supposed laws of nature
which operate in isolation as causes of rational thought
Here is also the place to take up an attitude towards a widely held conception of logical law, which characterizes correct thought by its conformity
with certain laws of thought (however we may formulate them), but is
disposed at the same time to interpret such conformity in the following
psychologistic manner: The laws of thought count as natural laws characterizing the peculiarity of our mind qua thinking, and the essence of the
conformity, as deﬁnitory of correct thinking, lies in the pure operation of
these laws, their non-disturbance by alien mental inﬂuences (such as custom,
inclination, tradition). (Cf. the citations above in §19 from Lipps’ article on
the task of epistemology.)
We need only instance one of the grave consequences of this doctrine.
Laws of thought, as causal laws governing acts of knowledge in their mental
interweaving, could only be stated in the form of probabilities. On this
basis, no assertion could be certainly judged correct, since probabilities,
taken as the standard of all certainty, must impress a merely probabilistic
stamp on all knowledge. We should stand confronted by the most extreme
probabilism. Even the assertion that all knowledge was merely probable
would itself only hold probably: this would hold of this latter assertion, and
so on in inﬁnitum. Since each successive step reduces the probability level of
the previous one a bit, we should become gravely concerned about the
worth of all knowledge. One may hope, however, that, with some luck, the
probability-levels of these inﬁnite series may always have the character of a
Cantorian ‘fundamental series’, of such a sort that the ﬁnal limiting value or
the probability of the knowledge to be judged is a real number > 0. Sceptical
awkwardnesses would of course vanish if one looked on the laws of thought
as matters of direct insight. But how should one have insight into causal laws?
Even if this difﬁculty were removed, we could still ask: Where on earth is
the proof that the pure operation of these laws (or any other laws) would
yield correct laws of thinking? Where are the descriptive and genetic analyses which entitle us to explain the phenomena of thought by two sorts of

Empiricistic consequences of psychologism

37

natural law, one exclusively determining such causal sequences as allow
logical thought to emerge, whereas others help to determine alogical thought?
Does the assessment of thoughts by logical laws amount to a proof of their
causal origin in these same laws as laws of nature?
It seems that certain ready confusions have here opened the way to
psychologistic errors. Logical laws have ﬁrst been confused with the judgements, in the sense of acts of judgement, in which we may know them: the
laws, as ‘contents of judgement’ have been confused with the judgements
themselves. The latter are real events, having causes and effects. Judgements
whose contents are laws are, in particular, frequently operative as thoughtmotives, directing the course of our thought-experience, as those contents,
the laws of thinking, prescribe. In such cases the real order and connection
of our thought-experiences conforms to that which we think generally in
our governing knowledge of the law: it is a concrete individual instance of
that general law. If, however, the law is confused with the judgement or
knowledge of the law, the ideal with the real, the law appears as a governing
power in our train of thought. With understandable ease a second confusion
is added to the ﬁrst: we confuse a law as a term in causation with a law as the
rule of causation. In other ﬁelds, too, we familiarly employ mythic talk of
natural laws as presiding powers in natural events – as if the rules of causal
connection could themselves once more signiﬁcantly function as causes,
i.e. as terms in just such connections. The serious confusion of things so
essentially dissimilar has plainly been favoured in the case before us by the
previous confusion of a law with the knowledge of a law. Logical laws
already appeared as motive powers in thinking. They presided causally, it
was imagined, over the course of our thoughts – they were accordingly
causal laws of thinking. They expressed how we must think in consequence
of the nature of our mind, they characterized the human mind as a thinking
mind in the pointed sense. If at times we think otherwise than these laws
require, we are not, properly speaking, ‘thinking’ at all, we are not judging
as the natural laws of thinking, or the nature of our mind qua thinking,
requires, but as other laws determine (once more causally). We are following the disturbing leads of custom, passion etc.
Other motives of course may have suggested the same conception. The
empirical fact that persons performing normally in a given sphere, e.g. scientists in their ﬁelds, usually judge in a logically correct manner, seems to
demand, as a natural explanation, that the logical laws by means of which
the correctness of thinking is assessed, also determine the course of thinking, in the manner of causal laws, while isolated deviations from the norm
may readily be put to the account of the troubling inﬂuences stemming from
other psychological sources.
Against this the following argument should sufﬁce. Let us imagine an
ideal person, in whom all thinking proceeds as logical laws require. Naturally the fact that this occurs must have its explanatory ground in certain
psychological laws, which govern the course of the mental experiences of

38 Prolegomena to pure logic

this being, starting from certain initial ‘collocations’. I now ask: Would the
natural laws and the logical laws in this assumed situation be one and the
same? Obviously the answer is ‘No’. Causal laws, according to which thought
must proceed in a manner which the ideal norms of logic might justify, are
by no means identical with those norms. If a being were so constituted as
never to be able to frame contradictory judgements in a uniﬁed train of
thought, as never to be able to perform inferences which defy the syllogistic
moods, this would not mean that the law of contradiction, the Modus Barbara
etc., were laws of nature explanatory of this being’s constitution. The example of a computer makes the difference quite clear. The arrangement and
connection of the ﬁgures which spring forth is regulated by natural laws
which accord with the demands of the arithmetical propositions which ﬁx
their meanings. No one, however, who wants to give a physical explanation
of the machine’s procedures, will appeal to arithmetical instead of mechanical laws. The machine is no thought-machine, it understands neither itself
nor the meaning of its performances. But our own thought-machine might
very well function similarly, except that the real course of one kind of thought
would always have to be recognized as correct by the insight brought forward in another. This latter thinking could be the product of the same or
other thought-machines, but ideal evaluation and causal explanation would
none the less remain disparate. The ‘initial collocations’ should also not be
forgotten: indispensable in causal explanation, they are senseless for ideal
evaluation.
The psychologistic logicians ignore the fundamental, essential, never-tobe-bridged gulf between ideal and real laws, between normative and causal
regulation, between logical and real necessity, between logical and real
grounds. No conceivable gradation could mediate between the ideal and the
real. It is characteristic of the low state of logical insights in our time, that a
thinker of Sigwart’s stature should dare, in connection with the ﬁction of
an intellectually ideal being like that discussed above, to maintain that,
for such a being, ‘logical necessity would also be a real necessity that engenders real thinking’, or that he should make use of the concept of thoughtcompulsion to elucidate the notion of ‘logical ground’ (Sigwart, Logik, ,
p. 259 f.). The same holds of Wundt when he sees in the law of sufﬁcient
reason the ‘basic law of the dependence of our thought-acts on one another’
(Wundt, Logik, , p. 573). That one is really concerned in these connections
with basic errors in logic will, one hopes, become a certainty, even to the
prejudiced, in the course of further investigations.

§23 A third consequence of psychologism,
and its refutation
A third consequence (see §21 above (excised from this edition) ) for the
psychologistic logician is that, if the laws of logic have their epistemological

Empiricistic consequences of psychologism

39

source in psychological matter of fact, if, e.g., as our opponents generally
say, they are normative transformations of such facts, they must themselves
be psychological in content, both by being laws for mental states, and also
by presupposing or implying the existence of such states. This is palpably
false. No logical law implies a ‘matter of fact’, not even the existence of
presentations or judgements or other phenomena of knowledge. No logical
law, properly understood, is a law for the facticities of mental life, and so
not a law for presentations (as experiences), nor for judgements (experiences
of judging), nor for our other mental experiences.
Most psychologistic thinkers are too deeply enthralled by their general
prejudice even to try to verify it in the case of the deﬁnitely acknowledged
logical laws. If such laws must be psychological, why try to show in detail
that they really are so? No one sees that a consistent psychologism would
force one to interpret logical laws in a manner quite alien to their true sense.
One fails to see that these laws, naturally understood, presuppose nothing
mental, no facts of psychic life, whether in their establishment or their content. They do so no more than the laws of pure mathematics do so.
If psychologism were on the right track, one should, in treating of syllogisms, expect only rules of the following type: It is an empirical fact that, in
circumstances X, conclusions of the form C, stamped with apodeictically
necessary consequence, attend upon premisses of the form P. To syllogize
‘correctly’, i.e. to achieve judgements of this distinctive stamp through
syllogizing, one must proceed in this manner, one must see that the circumstances really are X, and the premisses P. Mental matters of fact would then
be the matters regulated, the existence of such matters would be presupposed in the grounding of such laws, and would be part of their content. But
no single syllogistic rule is of such a type. What, e.g., does the mood Barbara
tell us? Only this: that, if in the case of any class-terms A, B, C all A’s are B’s
and all B’s C’s, then all A’s will be C’s. The Modus Ponens, likewise, written
out in full, reads: It is a valid law for any propositions P, Q, that if P is the
case, and it also is the case that if P is the case Q is so, then Q also is
the case. These and all similar laws are as little psychological as they are
empirical. They were of course set up by traditional logic to serve as norms
for our judging activities. But do they implicitly say anything about a single
actual judgement, or about any other mental phenomenon? If anyone thinks
they do let him prove it. Whatever a proposition implicitly asserts can be
inferred from it in a valid syllogism. But what forms of syllogism permit us
to deduce facts from a pure law?
It is irrelevant to object that talk of logical laws never could have arisen had
we not actually experienced presentations and judgements, and abstracted
the relevant, basic logical concepts from them, or that, wherever we understand and assert such laws, the existence of presentations and judgements is
implied, and can therefore be inferred. We need hardly observe that this does
not follow from our law, but from the fact that we understand and assert such

40 Prolegomena to pure logic

a law, and that a like consequence could be inferred from every assertion.
One ought not, further, to confuse the psychological presuppositions or components of the assertion of a law, with the logical ‘moments’ of its content.
‘Empirical laws’ have, eo ipso, a factual content. Not being true laws, they
merely say, roughly speaking, that certain coexistences or successions obtain
generally in certain circumstances, or may be expected, with varying probability, in varying circumstances. But even the strict laws of the natural
sciences are not without factual content. They do not merely concern facts,
but also imply their existence.
We must, however, be more precise. Exact laws, as normally formulated,
are pure laws: they exclude all factual content. But, if we consider the proofs
to which they owe their scientiﬁc justiﬁcation, it is at once clear that we
cannot justify them as pure laws, in their normal formulation. The law of
gravitation, as formulated in astronomy, has never really been proved. What
has been proved is a proposition of the form: Our knowledge up to date
serves to found a probability of the highest theoretical dignity to the effect
that, in so far as experience yields to the instruments on hand, either
Newton’s law, or one of the endlessly many conceivable mathematical laws
whose differences from Newton’s law lie within the limits of unavoidable
experimental error is true. This truth carries its big load of factual content,
and is not at all a law in the strict sense of the word. It also plainly includes
several vaguely delimited concepts.
All laws of fact in the exact sciences are accordingly genuine laws, but,
epistemologically considered, no more than idealizing ﬁctions with a fundamentum in re. They fulﬁl the task of rendering those theoretical sciences
possible, which bring the ideal of science as near as may be to actuality, and
so realize, to the extent that this can be within the unsurmountable limits of
human knowledge, the ideal of explanatory theory, of law-governed unity,
the highest theoretical aim of all scientiﬁc research into facts. Instead of the
absolute knowledge that is denied us, we use our insight on individual and
general facts of experience, and from these ﬁrst work out those apodeictic
probabilities (so to speak) in which all attainable knowledge of the real is
comprehended. We then reduce these probabilities to certain exact thoughts
having the genuine form of laws, and so succeed in building up formally perfect systems of explanatory theory. Such systems as theoretical mechanics,
theoretical acoustics, theoretical optics, theoretical astronomy etc., really
only hold as ideal possibilities with a fundamentum in re; they do not exclude
countless other possibilities, but even include these within limits. This, however, concerns us no further, nor are we concerned to discuss the practical
functions in knowledge of these ideal theories, their feats of successfully
predicting future facts or reconstructing past ones, and their technical feats
of enabling us to master nature practically. We return to the case we were
considering.
If, as we have shown, pure law remains a mere ideal in the realm of factual
knowledge, it is realized in the realm of ‘purely conceptual’ knowledge. In

Empiricistic consequences of psychologism

41

this sphere our purely logical laws belong, as well as the laws of mathesis pura.
Their origin, or, rather, their justifying proof, is not an inductive one, and so
they are free from that existential content which attaches to all probabilities
as such, even to such as are the highest and most valuable. What they say
has entire validity: they themselves in their absolute exactness are evident
and proven, and not, in their stead, certain other assertions of probability
of obviously vague constitution. The law we have is not one of countless
theoretical possibilities within a certain factually delimited sphere. It is the
single, sole truth which excludes all other possibilities and which, being established by insight, is kept pure from fact in its content and mode of proof.
The above considerations show how intimately the two halves of the
psychologistic case hang together: that logical laws do not merely entail
existential assertions of mental facts, but are also laws for such facts. We
have just refuted the ﬁrst half of their case. But the following argument
suggests that our refutation also covers the second half. For just as each law
established empirically and inductively from singular facts, is a law for such
facts, so, conversely, each law for facts is a law established empirically and
inductively, and from such a law, as has been shown, assertions with existential content are inseparable.
We ought of course to exclude from factual laws such general assertions
as merely apply pure conceptual propositions – which state universally valid
relations on a basis of pure concepts – to matters of fact. If 3 > 2, then the
three books on this table also exceed the two books in this cupboard, and so
for any things whatever. But our pure proposition of number does not refer
to things, but to numbers in their pure generality – it is the number 3 that is
greater than the number 2 – and it applies not merely to individual, but to
‘general’ objects, e.g. to species of colour or sound, to types of geometrical
ﬁgure and to suchlike timeless generalities.
If all this is admitted, it is of course impossible to regard logical laws
(considered in their purity) as the laws either of mental activities or of
mental products.

§24 Continuation
Many would perhaps try to evade our conclusion by objecting: Not every
law for facts has an empirico-inductive origin. We should rather draw a
distinction. All knowledge of law rests on experience, but not all such knowledge arises out of experience inductively, by the well-known logical process
which goes from singular facts, or empirical generalities of lower level, to
general laws. The laws of logic are, in particular, empirical, but not inductive laws. The basic notions of logic are abstracted from psychological
experience together with the purely conceptual relations given with them.
What we ﬁnd true in the individual case, we recognize at a glance to be true
universally, since based upon abstracted contents. Experience accordingly
yields an immediate awareness of the law-governed character of our mind.

42 Prolegomena to pure logic

And since we have no need of induction, our conclusion is likewise free
from inductive imperfection: it has no mere character of probability, but
one of apodeictic certainty. It is not vague, but precise in sense, it in no way
includes assertions having existential content.
What is here objected will not, however, do. Undoubtedly our knowledge
of logical laws, considered as an act of mind, presupposes an experience of
individuals, has its basis in concrete intuition. But one should not confuse
the psychological ‘presuppositions’ and ‘bases’ of the knowledge of a law,
with the logical presuppositions, the grounds and premisses, of that law: we
should also, therefore, not confuse psychological dependence (e.g. dependence of origin) with logical demonstration and justiﬁcation. The latter conforms to an insight into the objective relation of ground and consequence,
whereas the former relates to mental links of coexistence and succession. No
one can seriously hold that the concrete singular cases before us, on which
our insight into a law is ‘grounded’, really function as logical grounds or
premisses, as if the mere existence of such singulars entailed the universality
of law. Our intuitive grasp of the law may require two psychological steps:
one glance at the singulars of intuition, and a related insight into law. Logically, however, only one step is required. The content of our insight is not
inferred from singulars.
All knowledge ‘begins with experience’, but it does not therefore ‘arise’
from experience. What we assert is that each law for facts arises from experience, which means that it can only be inductively based on individual
experiences. If there are laws known by insight, these cannot (immediately)
be laws for facts. Where in the past immediate self-evidence has been claimed
for factual laws, it is clear that men have been confusing genuine factual
laws, i.e. laws of coexistence and succession, with ideal laws to which a
reference to deﬁnite times is alien, or that they have been confusing the
lively persuasive force of familiar empirical generalities, with the insight
only found in the realm of pure concepts.
Should such an argument not seem decisive, it can none the less serve to
strengthen other arguments. Another such argument will be here added.
Hardly anyone would deny that all laws of pure logic are of one and the
same character. If we can show, in the case of some of them, that they
cannot possibly be regarded as laws for facts, the same must hold for all of
them. Among logical laws there are, however, some which concern truths,
which have truths as their regular ‘objects’. It is the case, e.g., that for every
truth A, its contradictory opposite is no truth. It is the case, for each pair of
truths A, B, that their conjunctions and disjunctions1 are truths, and that if
three truths A, B, C are so related that A is a ground for B, B for C, that A
is also a ground for C. It is, however, absurd to treat laws which hold for
truths as such, as laws for facts. No truth is a fact, i.e. something determined as to time. A truth can indeed have as its meaning that something is,
that a state exists, that a change is going on etc. The truth itself is, however,

Empiricistic consequences of psychologism

43

raised above time: i.e. it makes no sense to attribute temporal being to it,
nor to say that it arises or perishes. This absurdity is clearest in the case of
the laws of truth themselves. If they were ‘real’ laws, they would be rules for
the coexistence and succession of facts, i.e. of such facts as are truths, and to
these facts, which they govern, they themselves as truths would belong. A
law would therefore ascribe a ‘coming and going’ to certain facts called
truths, among which, as one among others, the law would itself be found.
The law would arise and perish in conformity with the law, a patent absurdity. The case is similar if we treat the law of truth as a law of coexistence, as
temporally singular and yet ﬁxing a general rule for each and every existence
in time. Such absurdities2 are unavoidable if the fundamental distinction
between ideal and real objects, and the corresponding distinction between
ideal and real laws, is disregarded or misunderstood. We shall see repeatedly
how this distinction settles the disputes which divide psychologistic logic
from pure logic.

44
Prolegomena
Chapter
7 to pure logic

Psychologism as a sceptical
relativism

§32 The ideal conditions for the possibility of a
theory as such. The strict concept of scepticism
The worst objection that can be made to a theory, and particularly to a
theory of logic, is that it goes against the self-evident conditions for the
possibility of a theory in general. To set up a theory whose content is explicitly or implicitly at variance with the propositions on which the sense
and the claim to validity of all theory rests, is not merely wrong, but basically mistaken.
There are two respects in which one can here talk of the self-evident
‘conditions of the possibility’ of any theory whatever. One can talk of these
in a subjective respect. Here one’s concern is with the a priori conditions
upon which the possibility of immediate and mediate knowledge1 depends,
as also the possibility of rationally justifying any theory. The theory which
validates knowledge is itself a piece of knowledge: its possibility depends on
certain conditions, rooted, in purely conceptual fashion, in knowledge and
its relation to the knowing subject. It is, e.g. part of the notion of knowledge, in the strict sense, that it is a judgement that does not merely claim
to state truth, but is also certain of this claim’s justiﬁcation, and actually
possesses the justiﬁcation in question. If the judging person were never in a
position to have direct personal experience and apprehension of his judgement’s self-justifying character, if all his judgements lacked that inner
evidence which distinguishes them from blind prejudices, and yields him
luminous certainties, it would be impossible to provide a rational account
and a foundation for knowledge, or to discourse on theory and science. A
theory therefore violates the subjective conditions of its own possibility as
a theory, when, following our example, it in no way prefers an inwardly
evident judgement to a blind one. It thereby destroys the very thing that
distinguishes it from an arbitrary, unwarranted assertion.
It is plain that, by the subjective conditions of possibility, we do not here
mean real conditions rooted in the individual judging subject, or in the
varied species of judging beings (e.g. of human beings), but ideal conditions

Psychologism as a sceptical relativism

45

whose roots lie in the form of subjectivity as such, and in its relation to
knowledge. We shall distinguish them by speaking of noetic conditions.
In an objective respect, talk of the conditions for the possibility of any
theory do not concern the theory as a subjective unity of items of knowledge, but theory as an objective unity of truths or propositions, bound
together by relations of ground and consequent. The conditions here are all
the laws whose foundation lies purely in the notion of theory, or more
speciﬁcally, in the notions of truth, of proposition, of object, of property, of
relation etc., the notions, i.e. which enter essentially into the concept of theoretical unity. To deny these laws amounts to an assertion that all such terms
– theory, truth, object, property etc. – lack a coherent sense. A theory is selfdestroying, in this logico-objective respect, if its content offends against the
laws without which theory as such can have no rational, no coherent sense.
The logical offences of such a theory can lie in its presuppositions, in its
forms of theoretic connection, or in the thesis that it sets forth. The violation
of logical conditions is at its grossest when the sense of the theoretic thesis
involves a rejection of those laws on which the rational possibility of any
thesis, and the proof of any thesis, depend. The same holds of noetic conditions and of theories which violate them. We may distinguish (without attempting a classiﬁcation) between false, nonsensical, logically and noetically
absurd, and ﬁnally sceptical theories. The last cover all theories whose theses
either plainly say, or analytically imply, that the logical or noetic conditions
for the possibility of any theory are false.
The term ‘scepticism’ is thus connected with a clear concept and is clearly
divided into logical and noetic scepticism. The concept of such scepticism
applies to the ancient forms of scepticism with theses such as: There is no
truth, no knowledge, no justiﬁcation of knowledge etc. Our previous treatments have shown2 that empiricism, whether moderate or extreme, is an
instance of our pregnant concept of scepticism. That it is of the essence of a
sceptical theory to be nonsensical, is at once plain from its deﬁnition.

§33 Scepticism in the metaphysical sense
The term ‘scepticism’ is commonly used with some vagueness. Ignoring its
popular sense, we ﬁnd that philosophical theories are called ‘sceptical’ if
they try to limit human knowledge considerably and on principle, and especially if they remove from the sphere of possible knowledge wide ﬁelds of
real being, or such especially precious sciences as metaphysics, natural science,
or ethics as a rational discipline.
Among such inauthentic forms of scepticism there is one which is readily
confused with the purely epistemic scepticism here deﬁned, which would
limit knowledge to mental existence, and would deny the existence or
knowability of ‘things in themselves’. Such theories are plainly metaphysical,
they have no connection with scepticism proper, their thesis is free from

46 Prolegomena to pure logic

logical and noetic absurdity, their claim to validity is a mere question of
arguments and proofs. Confusions and genuinely sceptical modiﬁcations
then only arise from the paralogistic inﬂuence of tempting ambiguities or of
sceptical convictions elsewhere fostered. If, e.g., a metaphysical sceptic states
his view in the form ‘There is no objective knowledge’ (i.e. no knowledge of
things in themselves), or ‘All knowledge is subjective’ (i.e. all factual knowledge is merely the knowledge of facts of consciousness), there is a great
temptation to yield to the ambiguity of the subject-object terminology, and
to transform the original sense which suits our metaphysical standpoint into
a noetic-sceptical sense. The proposition ‘All knowledge is subjective’ becomes the totally new assertion ‘All knowledge as a conscious phenomenon
is subject to the laws of human consciousness: the so-called forms and laws
of knowledge are merely functional forms of consciousness, or laws governing such functional forms, i.e. psychological laws’. When metaphysical
scepticism thus wrongly favours epistemological scepticism, the latter, contrariwise, if taken to be self-evident, seems to provide powerful arguments
for the former. People reason, e.g.:
Logical laws, as laws for our functions of knowing, lack ‘real meaning’;
we can at least never know if they agree with things in themselves. To
assume a ‘preformation-system’ is wholly gratuitous. If the comparison
of an item of knowledge with its object (needed to establish an adaequatio
rei et intellectus) is excluded by the notion of the thing-in-itself, this
applies also to the comparison of the subjective laws of our conscious
functions with the objective being of things and their laws. If there are
things in themselves, we can know nothing whatever about them.
Metaphysical questions do not concern us here. We have mentioned them
only to have before us at an early stage, an instance of the confusion between
metaphysical and logico-noetic scepticism.

§34 The concept of relativism and its specific forms
In order to criticize psychologism we have yet to discuss the concept of
subjectivism or relativism which also is part of the above-mentioned metaphysical theory. One of its original forms is caught in the Protagorean formula: ‘Man is the measure of all things’, provided this last is interpreted as
saying ‘The individual man is the measure of all truth.’ For each man that is
true which seems to him true, one thing to one man and the opposite to
another, if that is how he sees it. We can therefore also opt for the formula
‘All truth (and knowledge) is relative – relative to the contingently judging
subject’. If, however, instead of such a subject, we make some contingent
species of judging beings the pivot of our relations, we achieve a new form
of relativism. Man as such is then the measure of all human truth. Every

Psychologism as a sceptical relativism

47

judgement whose roots are to be found in what is speciﬁc to man, in the
constitutive laws of man as species – is a true judgement, for us human
beings. To the extent that such judgements belong to the form of common
human subjectivity, the term ‘subjectivism’ is in place here too (in talk of
the subject as the ultimate source of knowledge etc.). It is best to employ the
term ‘relativism’, and to distinguish individual from speciﬁc relativism. The restriction of the latter to the human species, stamps it as anthropologism. We
turn to criticism. Our interests demand that it should be very careful.

§35 Critique of individual relativism
Individual relativism is such a bare-faced and (one might almost say) ‘cheeky’
scepticism, that it has certainly not been seriously held in modern times. It
is a doctrine no sooner set up than cast down, though only for one who
recognizes the objectivity of all that pertains to logic. One cannot persuade
the subjectivist any more than one can the open sceptic, a man simply lacking the ability to see that laws such as the law of contradiction have their
roots in the mere meaning of truth, that from these it follows that talk of a
subjective truth, that is one thing for one man and the opposite for another,
must count as the purest nonsense. He will not bow to the ordinary objection that in setting up his theory he is making a claim to be convincing to
others, a claim presupposing that very objectivity of truth which his thesis
denies. He will naturally reply: My theory expresses my standpoint, what is
true for me, and need be true for no one else. Even the subjective fact of his
thinking, he will treat as true for himself, and not as true in itself.3 That we
should, however, be able to convince the subjectivist personally, and make
him admit his error, is not important: what is important is to refute him in
an objectively valid manner. Refutation presupposes the leverage of certain
self-evident, universally valid convictions. Such are those trivial insights on
which every scepticism must come to grief, insights which show up sceptical
doctrines as in the strictest, most genuine sense nonsensical. The content of
such assertions rejects what is part of the sense or content of every assertion
and what accordingly cannot be signiﬁcantly separated from any assertion.

§36 Critique of specific relativism and, in particular,
of anthropologism
In the case of subjectivism, it is doubtful whether anyone seriously holds it.
Modern and recent philosophy leans, however, so strongly towards speciﬁc
relativism, and, in particular, towards anthropologism, that it is quite rare
to encounter a thinker free from the taint of such erroneous doctrines. But
such doctrines are, however, sceptical in the sense deﬁned above, and so
suffer from the grossest absurdities conceivable in a theory: we ﬁnd in them,
too, slightly masked, an evident contradiction between the sense of their

48 Prolegomena to pure logic

thesis, and that which cannot be separated from the sense of any thesis qua
thesis. It is not hard to show this in detail:
1. Speciﬁc relativism makes the assertion: Anything is true for a given species
of judging beings that, by their constitution and laws of thought, must count
as true. This doctrine is absurd. For it is part of its sense that the same proposition or content of judgement can be true for a subject of the species homo,
but may be false for another subject of a differently constituted species. The
same content of judgement cannot, however, be both true and false: this
follows from the mere sense of ‘true’ and ‘false’. If the relativist gives these
words their appropriate meaning, his thesis is in conﬂict with its own sense.
It is plainly a vain evasion to plead that the words of the adduced principle of contradiction were incomplete, but that, when we unfolded the sense
of the words ‘true’ and ‘false’, it was the humanly true and false that were in
question. For the ordinary subjectivist could likewise plead that talk about
the true and the false was inexact, and that truth (or falsehood) for the
individual were what was really meant. And one would of course answer
him by saying: An evidently valid law cannot have a plainly absurd meaning, and talk of what is true for this one or that one is absurd. It is absurd to
regard it as an open possibility that the same judged content – with dangerous ambiguity we say ‘the same judgement’ – should be alike true and false,
as one or other judges it. There will be a corresponding answer to speciﬁc
relativism: ‘Truth for this or that species’, e.g. for the human species, is, as
here meant, an absurd mode of speech. It can no doubt be used in a good
sense, but it then means something wholly different, i.e. the circle of truths
to which man as such has access. What is true is absolutely, intrinsically
true: truth is one and the same, whether men or non-men, angels or gods
apprehend and judge it. Logical laws speak of truth in this ideal unity, set
over against the real multiplicity of races, individuals and experiences, and it
is of this ideal unity that we all speak when we are not confused by relativism.
2. We saw that the principles of contradiction and excluded middle tell us
what pertains to the mere sense of the words ‘true’ and ‘false’. In this regard
it is possible to restate our objection in the words: If the relativist says that
there could be beings not bound by these principles – this assertion is easily
seen as equivalent to the relativistic formula stated above – he either means
that there could be propositions or truths, in the judgements of such beings,
which do not conform to these principles, or he thinks that the course of
judgement of such beings is not psychologically regulated by these principles. If he means the latter, his doctrine is not at all peculiar, since we
ourselves are such beings. (One need only recall our objections to the
psychologistic interpretation of logical principles.) But if he means the former,
we may simply reply: Either such beings understand the words ‘true’ and
‘false’ in our sense, in which case it is irrational to speak of logical principles
not holding, since they pertain to the mere sense of these words as understood
by us. We should never dream of calling anything true or false, that was at

Psychologism as a sceptical relativism

49

variance with them. Alternatively, such beings use the words ‘true’ and
‘false’ in some different sense, and the whole dispute is then one of words.
If, e.g., they call those things ‘trees’ which we call ‘propositions’, then the
statements in which the logical laws are expressed of course do not hold, but
they will also have lost the sense in which we asserted them. It therefore
comes out that the sense of the word ‘truth’ has been totally altered by
relativism, which yet pretends to talk of truth in the sense laid down by the
logical laws, which is the only sense we all employ when we talk of truth. In
a single sense there is only a single truth, in an equivocal sense there are
naturally as many ‘truths’ as there are equivocal uses.
3. The constitution of a species is a fact: from a fact it is only possible to
derive other facts. To base facts relativistically on the constitution of the
species therefore means to give it a factual character. This is absurd. Every
fact is individually and therefore temporally determinate. In the case of
truth, talk of temporal determination only makes sense in regard to a fact
posited by a truth (provided, that is, that it is a truth about facts): it makes
no sense in regard to the truth itself. It is absurd to think of truths as being
causes or effects, as we have already indicated. If someone wished to argue
from the fact that a true judgement, like any judgement, must spring from
the constitution of the judging subject in virtue of appropriate natural laws,
we should warn him not to confuse the ‘judgement’, qua content of judgement, i.e. as an ideal unity, with the individual, real act of judgement. It is
the former that we mean when we speak of the judgement 2 × 2 = 4, which
is the same whoever passes it. One should likewise not confuse the true
judgement, as the correct judgement in accordance with truth, with the truth
of this judgement or with the true content of judgement. My act of judging
that 2 × 2 = 4 is no doubt causally determined, but this is not true of the
truth 2 × 2 = 4.
4. If, as anthropologism says, all truth has its source in our common human
constitution, then, if there were no such constitution, there would be no truth.
The thesis of this hypothetical assertion is absurd, since the proposition ‘There
is no truth’ amounts in sense to the proposition ‘There is a truth that there is
no truth’. The absurdity of the thesis entails the absurdity of the hypothesis,
but, since the hypothesis represents the negation of a valid proposition, having
factual content, it admits of falsehood but not of absurdity. No one has in
fact ever thought of rejecting as absurd those geological and physical theories which give the human race a beginning and an end in time. The stigma of
absurdity therefore taints the whole hypothetical statement, since it connects
an antecedent having a coherent (‘logically possible’) sense with an absurd
(‘logically impossible’) consequent. The same stigma then taints anthropologism, and extends naturally, mutatis mutandis, to the wider form of relativism.
5. On a relativistic view the constitution of a species might yield the ‘truth’,
valid for the species, that no such constitution existed. Must we then say that
there is in reality no such constitution, or that it exists, but only for us? But

50 Prolegomena to pure logic

what if all men, and all species of judging beings, were destroyed, with the
exception of the species in question? We are obviously talking nonsense. The
notion that the non-existence of a certain constitution should be based on this
very constitution, is a ﬂat contradiction: that the truth-conditioning, and
therefore existent constitution should condition the truth (among other truths)
of its own non-existence. The absurdity is not greatly lessened if we substitute
existence for non-existence, and apply our arguments, not to an imaginary
species, which from a relativistic standpoint is possible, but to our human
species. Our contradiction then vanishes, but not the absurdity associated with
it. The relativity of truth means that, what we call truth, depends on the constitution of the species homo and the laws which govern this species. Such a
dependence will and can only be thought of as causal. The truth that such
a constitution and such laws subsist must then have its real explanation in
the fact of this subsistence: the principles of our explanation must be identical
with such laws – again mere nonsense. Our constitution would be causa sui
in respect of laws, which would cause themselves in virtue of themselves etc.
6. The relativity of truth entails the relativity of cosmic existence. For the
world is merely the uniﬁed objective totality corresponding to, and inseparable from, the ideal system of all factual truth. One cannot subjectivize
truth, and allow its object (which only exists as long as truth subsists) to
count as absolutely existent, or as existent ‘in itself’. There would therefore
be no world ‘in itself’, but only a world for us, or for any other chance
species of being. This may suit some, but it becomes dubious once we point
out that the ego and its conscious contents also pertain to the world. That I
am, and that I am experiencing this or that, might be false if my speciﬁc
constitution were such as to force me to deny these propositions. And there
would be absolutely no world, not merely no world for this or that one, if
no actual species of judging beings in the world was so constituted as to
have to recognize a world (and itself in that world). If we conﬁne ourselves
to the only species actually known to us, animal species, then a change in
their constitution would mean a change in the world, and that although
animal species are thought to be evolutionary products of the world. We are
playing a pretty game: man evolves from the world and the world from
man; God creates man and man God.
The essential core of this objection lies in the self-evident conﬂict between
relativism and the inner evidence of immediately intuited existence, i.e. with
the evidence of ‘inner observation’ in the legitimate, indispensable sense.
The inner evidence of judgements resting on intuition is rightly contested
when such judgements intentionally transcend the content of the actual data
of consciousness. They have true inward evidence when their intention rests
on this content itself, and ﬁnds fulﬁlment in it, just as it is. This inner
evidence is not attainted by the vagueness of all such judgements: one need
only think of the ineliminable vagueness of the determination of time, and
perhaps also of place, in any immediate judgement of intuition.

Psychologism as a sceptical relativism

51

§37 General observation. The concept of relativism
in an extended sense
Our two forms of relativism are special cases of relativism in the widest
sense of the word, as a doctrine which somehow derives the pure principles
of logic from facts. Facts are ‘contingent’: they might very well not have
been the case, they might have been different. If the facts then differ, logical
principles also will differ; they will also be contingent, with a being relative
to the facts on which they are founded. I do not wish to counter this by
merely bringing in the apodeictic inner evidence of logical laws, points argued
for in former chapters: I wish to bring in another point which is more
important in this context (cf. §32 of the present chapter). Anyone can see
from my statements up to this point that for me the pure truths of logic
are all the ideal laws which have their whole foundation in the ‘sense’,
the ‘essence’ or the ‘content’, of the concepts of Truth, Proposition, Object,
Property, Relation, Combination, Law, Fact etc. More generally stated,
they have their whole foundation in the sense of the concepts which make
up the heritage of all science, which represent the categories of constituents
out of which science as such is essentially constituted. Laws of this sort
should not be violated by any theoretical assertion, proof or theory, not
because such a thing would render the latter false – so would conﬂict with
any truth – but because it would render them inherently absurd. An assertion, e.g., whose content quarrels with the principles whose roots lie in
the sense of truth as such, is self-cancelling. For to assert, is to maintain the
truth of this or that content. A proof whose content quarrels with the principles rooted in the sense of the relation of ground and consequent, is selfcancelling. For to prove, is to state that there is such and such a relation of
ground and consequent etc. That an assertion is ‘self-cancelling’, is ‘logically
absurd’, means that its particular content (sense, meaning) contradicts the
general demands of its own, pertinent meaning-categories, contradicts what
has its general root in the general meaning of those categories. It is now
clear that, in this pregnant sense, any theory is logically absurd which deduces
logical principles from any matters of fact. To do so is at variance with the
general sense of the concepts of ‘logical principle’ and ‘fact’, or, to speak
more precisely and more generally, of the concepts of ‘truth based on the
mere content of concepts’ and ‘truth concerning individual existence’. It is
easy to see that the objections against the above discussed relativistic theory
are, in the main, objections to relativism in the most general sense.

§38 Psychologism in all its forms is a relativism
In our attacks on relativism, we have of course had psychologism in mind.
Psychologism in all its subvarieties and individual elaborations is in fact the
same as relativism, though not always recognized and expressly allowed to

52 Prolegomena to pure logic

be such. It makes no difference whether, as a formal idealism, based on a
‘transcendental psychology’, it seeks to save the objectivity of knowledge,
or whether, leaning on empirical psychology, it accepts relativism as its
ineluctable fate.
Every doctrine is ipso facto relativistic, a case of speciﬁc relativism, if,
with the empiricists, it treats the pure laws of logic as empirical, psychological laws. It is likewise relativistic, if, with the apriorists, it deduces these
laws, in more or less mythic fashion, from certain ‘original forms’ or ‘modes
of functioning’ of the (human) understanding, from consciousness as such,
conceived as generic (human) reason, from the psycho-physical constitution
of man, from the intellectus ipse which, as an innate (generically human)
disposition, precedes all actual thought and experience. All the objections
we have made to speciﬁc relativism also affect such doctrines. One must of
course take the somewhat shifting key-words of apriorism, e.g. ‘understanding’, ‘reason’, ‘consciousness’, in the natural sense which gives them an
essential connection with the human species. It is the curse of the theories
under consideration that they at one time give these words a real, at another
time an ideal sense, and so weave an inextricable tangle of true and false
statements. Aprioristic theories, to the extent that they yield to relativistic
motives, must be counted as relativistic. Such relativism is no doubt restricted, i.e., to the realm of mathematics and natural science, when, as in
the case of some Kantian thinkers, certain logical principles are set aside as
principles of ‘analytic’ judgements, but sceptical absurdities are not thereby
avoided. For, in their narrower ﬁeld, they still deduce truth from generic
human nature, the ideal from the real, or, more precisely, the necessity of
laws from the contingency of facts.
We are, however, more interested in the extreme, consistent psychologism
which permits no such restrictions. To such a psychologism the main English
empiricists, as well as the more recent German logicians, belong, i.e. thinkers such as Mill, Bain, Wundt, Sigwart, Erdmann and Lipps. To criticize all
such works is neither possible nor desirable. In view, however, of the reformatory aims of these Prolegomena, I do not wish to pass over the main
works of modern German logic, and especially not the important work of
Sigwart, which, more than any other, has pushed logic in the last decades
into psychological channels.

Chapter 8

The psychologistic prejudices

53

The psychologistic prejudices

So far our attack has been mainly upon the consequences of psychologism.
We now turn against its arguments: we shall try to show that what it regards
as obvious truths are in fact delusive prejudices.

§41 First prejudice
A ﬁrst prejudice runs: Prescriptions which regulate what is mental must
obviously have a mental basis. It is accordingly self-evident that the normative
principles of knowledge must be grounded in the psychology of knowledge.
One’s delusion vanishes as soon as one abandons general argumentation
and turns to the ‘things themselves’.
We must ﬁrst put an end to a distorted notion which both parties share,
by pointing out that logical laws, taken in and for themselves, are not normative propositions at all in the sense of prescriptions, i.e. propositions which
tell us, as part of their content, how one should judge. One must always
distinguish between laws that serve as norms for our knowledge-activities,
and laws which include normativity in their thought-content, and assert its
universal obligatoriness.
Let us take as an example the well-known syllogistic principle we expressed in the words: A mark of a mark is also a mark of the thing
itself. This statement would be commendably brief if its expression were
not also an obvious falsehood.1 To express it concretely, we shall have to
adjust ourselves to a few more words. ‘It is true of every pair of characters
A, B, that if every object which has the character A also has the character B,
and if any deﬁnite object S has the character A, then it also has the character B.’ That this proposition contains the faintest thought of normativity
must be strongly denied. We can employ our proposition for normative
purposes, but it is not therefore a norm. Anyone who judges that every A
is also B, and that a certain S is A, ought also to judge that this S is B.
Everyone sees, however, that this proposition is not the original proposition
of logic, but one that has been derived from it by bringing in the thought of
normativity.

54 Prolegomena to pure logic

The same obviously holds of all syllogistic laws, as of all laws of pure
logic as such.2 But not of such laws alone. A capacity for normative use is
shared by the truths of other theoretical disciplines, and above all by those
of pure mathematics, which are usually kept separate from logic.3 The wellknown principle
(a + b) (a − b) = a2 − b2
tells us, e.g. that the product of the sum and the difference of any two
numbers equals the difference of their squares. Here there is no reference to
our judging and the manner in which it should be conducted; what we have
before us is a theoretical law, not a practical rule. If, however, we consider
the corresponding practical proposition: ‘To arrive at the product of the
sum and difference of two numbers, one should ﬁnd the difference of their
squares’, we have conversely uttered a practical rule and not a theoretical
law. Here, too, the transformation of law into rule involves a bringing in of
the notion of normativity; the rule is the obvious, apodeictic consequence
of the law, but it none the less differs from it in thought-content.
We can even go further. It is clear that any theoretical truth belonging to
any ﬁeld of theory, can be used in a like manner as the foundation for a universal norm of correct judgement. The laws of logic are not at all peculiar in
this respect. In their proper nature, they are not normative but theoretical
truths, and as such we can employ them, as we can the truths of all other
disciplines, as norms for our judgement.
We cannot, however, treat the general persuasion that the laws of logic
are norms of thinking as quite baseless, nor the obviousness with which it
impresses us as a mere delusion. These laws must have some intrinsic prerogative in the regulation of our thought. But does this mean that the idea
of regulation, or of an ‘ought’, must therefore form part of the content of
such laws? Can it not follow from that content with self-evident necessity?
In other words: May not the laws of logic and pure mathematics have a
distinctive meaning-content which gives them a natural right to regulate our
thought?
This simple treatment shows us how both sides have made their mistakes.
The anti-psychologists went wrong by making the regulation of knowledge the ‘essence’, as it were, of the laws of logic. The purely theoretical
character of formal logic, and its identity of character with formal mathematics, were thereby insufﬁciently recognized. It was correctly seen that the
set of laws treated in traditional syllogistic theory were remote from psychology. Their natural right to regulate knowledge was recognized, for which
reason they must be made the kernel of all practical logic. The difference
between the proper content of these laws, and their function, their practical
application, was, however, ignored. Men failed to see that so-called basic
laws of logic were not in themselves norms, though they could be used
normatively. Concern with this normative use had led men to speak of such

The psychologistic prejudices

55

laws as laws of thought, and so it appeared that these laws, too, had a psychological content, and that their only difference from what are ordinarily
called psychological laws lay in this normative function, not possessed by
other psychological laws.
The psychologistic thinkers, on the other hand, went wrong in putting
forward a presumed axiom whose invalidity we may expose in a few words:
It is entirely obvious that each general truth, whether psychological or not,
serves to found a rule for correct judgement, but this not only assures us of
the meaningful possibility, but even of the actual existence of rules of judgement which do not have their basis in psychology.
Not all rules which set standards for correct judgement are on that account
logical rules. It is, however, evident that, of the genuinely logical rules which
form the nucleus of a technology of scientiﬁc thinking, only one set permits
and demands a psychological establishment: the technical precepts speciﬁcally adapted to human nature concerning the acquisition and criticism of
scientiﬁc knowledge. The remaining, much more important group consists
of normative transformations of laws, which belong solely to the objective
or ideal content of the science. Psychological logicians, even such as are of
the stature of a Mill or a Sigwart, treat science from its subjective side (as a
methodology of the speciﬁcally human acquisition of knowledge), rather
than from its objective side (as the Idea of the theoretical unity of truth),
and therefore lay one-sided stress on the methodological tasks of logic. In
doing so they ignore the fundamental difference between the norms of pure
logic and the technical rules of a speciﬁcally human art of thought. These are
totally different in character in their content, origin and function. The laws
of logic, seen in their original intent, concern only what is ideal, while these
methodological propositions concern only what is real. If the former spring
from immediately evident axioms, the latter spring from empirical facts,
belonging mainly to psychology. If the formulation of the former promotes
our purely theoretical interests, and gives only subsidiary practical help, the
latter, on the other hand, have an immediate practical aim, and they only
give indirect help to our theoretical interests, in so far as they aim at the
methodical progress of scientiﬁc knowledge.

§44 Second prejudice
To conﬁrm his ﬁrst prejudice that rules for cognition must rest on the psychology of cognition, the psychologistic party appeals to the actual content
of logic (cf. the arguments of §15 above). What is logic about? Everywhere it
concerns itself with presentations and judgements, with syllogisms and proofs,
with truth and probability, with necessity and possibility, with ground and
consequent, and with other closely related or connected concepts. But what
can be thought of under such headings but mental phenomena and formations? This is obvious in the case of presentations and judgements. Syllogisms,

56 Prolegomena to pure logic

however, are proofs of judgements by means of judgements, and proof is
plainly a mental activity. Talk of truth, probability, necessity, possibility
etc., likewise concerns judgements: what they refer to can only be manifested or experienced in judgements. Is it not, therefore, strange that one
should wish to exclude from psychology propositions and theories which
relate to psychological phenomena? In this regard the distinction between
purely logical and methodological propositions is pointless, the objection
affects both equally. Every attempt, therefore, to extrude even a part of logic
from psychology, on ground of its pretended ‘purity’, must count as radically
mistaken.

§45 Refutation. Pure mathematics would likewise be
made a branch of psychology
Obvious as all this may seem, it must be mistaken. This is shown by the
absurd consequences which, as we know, psychologism cannot escape. There
is, however, another reason for misgiving: the natural afﬁnity between purely
logical and mathematical doctrine, which has often led to an assertion of
their theoretical unity.
We have already mentioned by the way that even Lotze taught that mathematics must be regarded as ‘an independently developed branch of general
logic’. ‘Only a practically motivated division of teaching’ can, he thinks,
blind us to the fact that mathematics ‘has its whole home-ground in the
general ﬁeld of logic’ (Logik, ed. 2, §18, p. 34 and §112, p. 138). To which
Riehl adds that ‘one could well say that logic coincides with the general
part of purely formal mathematics (taken in the sense of H. Hankel)’ (A.
Riehl, Der philosophische Kritizismus und seine Bedeutung für die positive
Wissenschaft, vol. , Part , p. 226). However this may be, an argument that
is correct for logic must be approved in the case of arithmetic as well.
Arithmetic sets up laws for numbers, for their relations and combinations:
numbers, however, are the products of colligation and counting, which are
mental activities. Relations arise from relating activities, combinations from
acts of combination. Adding and multiplying, subtracting and dividing –
these are merely mental processes. That they require sensuous supports makes
no difference, since this is true of any and every act of thinking. Sums,
products, differences and quotients, and whatever may be determined in
arithmetical propositions, are merely mental processes, and must as such
obey mental laws. It may be highly desirable that modern psychology with
its earnest pursuit of exactness should be widened to include mathematical
theories, but it would hardly be much elevated by the inclusion of mathematics itself as one of its parts. For the heterogeneity of the two sciences
cannot be denied. The mathematician, on the other hand, would merely
smile if psychological studies were pressed upon him as supposedly providing a better and deeper grounding for his theoretical pronouncements. He

The psychologistic prejudices

57

would rightly say that mathematics and psychology belong to such different
worlds, that the very thought of interchange among them was absurd: here,
if anywhere, talk of a µετbβασι ε
 dλλο γνο is applicable.4

§46 The research domain of pure logic is, like that
of mathematics, an ideal domain
These objections may have taken our argument far aﬁeld, but, when we attend
to their content, they help us to state the basic errors of our opponents’
position. The comparison of pure logic with pure mathematics, its mature sister
discipline, which no longer needs ﬁght for its right to independent existence,
provides us with a reliable Leitmotiv. We shall ﬁrst glance at mathematics.
No one regards the theories of pure mathematics, e.g. the pure theory of
numbers, as ‘parts or branches of psychology’, though we should have no
numbers without counting, no sums without addition, no products without
multiplication etc. The patterns of all arithmetical operations refer back to
certain mental acts of arithmetical operation, and only in reﬂection upon
these can we ‘show’ what a total, sum, product etc., is. In spite of the
‘psychological origin’ of arithmetical concepts, everyone sees it to be a fallacious µετbβασι to demand that mathematical laws should be psychological.
How is this to be explained? Only one answer is possible. Counting and
arithmetical operation as facts, as mental acts proceeding in time, are of
course the concern of psychology, since it is the empirical science of mental
facts in general. Arithmetic is in a totally different position. Its domain of
research is known, it is completely and exhaustively determined by the
familiar series of ideal species 1, 2, 3 . . . In this sphere there can be no
talk of individual facts, of what is temporally deﬁnite. Numbers, Sums
and Products and so forth are not such casual acts of counting, adding and
multiplying etc., as proceed here and there. They also differ obviously from
presentations in which they are given. The number Five is not my own or
anyone else’s counting of ﬁve, it is also not my presentation or anyone else’s
presentation of ﬁve. It is in the latter regard a possible object of acts of
presentation, whereas, in the former, it is the ideal species of a form whose
concrete instances are found in what becomes objective in certain acts of
counting, in the collective whole that these constitute. In no case can it be
regarded without absurdity as a part or side of a mental experience, and so
not as something real. If we make clear to ourselves what the number Five
truly is, if we conceive of it adequately, we shall ﬁrst achieve an articulate,
collective presentation of this or that set of ﬁve objects. In this act a collection is intuitively given in a certain formal articulation, and so as an instance of the number-species in question. Looking at this intuited individual,
we perform an ‘abstraction’, i.e. we not only isolate the non-independent
moment of collective form in what is before us, but we apprehend the Idea
in it: the number Five as the species of the form swims into our conscious

58 Prolegomena to pure logic

sphere of reference. What we are now meaning is not this individual instance, not the intuited object as a whole, not the form immanent in it, but
still inseparable from it: what we mean is rather the ideal form-species,
which is absolutely one in the sense of arithmetic, in whatever mental act it
may be individuated for us in an intuitively constituted collective, a species
which is accordingly untouched by the contingency, temporality and transience of our mental acts. Acts of counting arise and pass away and cannot
be meaningfully mentioned in the same breath as numbers.
Arithmetical propositions are concerned with such ideal unities (‘lowest
species’ in a heightened sense quite different from that of empirical classes),
and this holds both of numerical propositions (arithmetical singulars) and
of algebraic propositions (arithmetical generalizations). They tell us nothing
about what is real, neither about the real things counted, nor about the real
acts in which they are counted, in which such and such indirect numerical
characteristics are constituted for us. Concrete numbers and numerical propositions belong in the scientiﬁc ﬁelds to which the relevant concrete units
belong: propositions about arithmetical thought-processes belong in psychology. In strict propriety, arithmetical propositions say nothing about
‘what is contained in our mere number-presentations’: as little as they speak
of other presentations, do they speak of ours. They are rather concerned
with absolute numbers and number-combinations in their abstract purity
and ideality. The propositions of universal arithmetic – the nomology of
arithmetic we may call it – are laws rooted in the ideal essence of the genus
Number. The ultimate singulars which come within the range of these laws,
are ideal singulars: they are the determinate numbers, i.e. the lowest speciﬁc
differences of the genus number. It is to these singulars that arithmetically
singular propositions relate, propositions which belong to the arithmetic of
deﬁnite numbers. These arise through the application of universal arithmetical laws to numerically speciﬁc numbers, they express what is purely part of
the ideal essence of these numbers. None of these propositions reduces to
one that has empirical generality, not even to the widest case of such generality, one that applies without exception to the entire real world.
What we have here said in regard to pure arithmetic carries over at all
points to pure logic. In the latter case too, we accept as obvious the fact that
logical concepts have a psychological origin, but we deny the psychologistic
conclusion to which this seems to lead. In consideration of the domain that
must be granted to logic in the sense of a technology of scientiﬁc knowledge,
we naturally do not doubt that logic is to a large extent concerned with our
mental states. Naturally the methodology of scientiﬁc research and proof
must take full cognizance of the nature of the mental states in which research and proof take their course. Logical terms such as ‘presentation’,
‘concept’, ‘judgement’, ‘syllogism’, ‘proof’, ‘theory’, ‘necessity’, ‘truth’ etc.,
may therefore, and must therefore, come up as general names for psychical
experiences and dispositions. We deny, however, that this ever occurs in the

The psychologistic prejudices

59

purely logical parts of logical technology. We deny that the theoretical discipline of pure logic, in the independent separateness proper to it, has any
concern with mental facts, or with laws that might be styled ‘psychological’.
We saw that the laws of pure logic, e.g. the primitive ‘laws of thought’, or
the syllogistic formulae, totally lose their basic sense, if one tries to interpret
them as psychological. It is therefore clear from the start that the concepts
which constitute these and similar laws have no empirical range. They cannot,
in other words, have the character of those mere universal notions whose
range is that of individual singulars, but they must be notions truly generic,
whose range is exclusively one of ideal singulars, genuine species. It is clear,
for the rest, that the terms in question, and all such as function in purely
logical contexts, must be equivocal; they must, on the one hand, stand for
class-concepts of mental states such as belong in psychology, but, on the
other hand, for generic concepts covering ideal singulars, which belong in a
sphere of pure law.

§49 Third prejudice. Logic as the theory of evidence
We shall state a third prejudice – one particularly to the fore in the arguments of chapter 11, §19 in this volume – in the following words: All truth
pertains to judgement. Judgement, however, is only recognized as true when
it is inwardly evident. The term ‘inner evidence’ stands, it is said, for a
peculiar mental character, well-known to everyone through his inner experience, a peculiar feeling which guarantees the truth of the judgement to
which it attaches. If logic is the technology which will assist us to know the
truth, logical laws are obviously psychological propositions. They are, in
fact, propositions which cast light on the psychological conditions on which
the presence or absence of this ‘feeling of inner evidence’ depends. Practical
prescriptions are naturally connected with such propositions, and help us to
achieve judgements having this distinctive character. Such psychologically
based rules of thought must surely be meant where we speak of logical laws
or norms.
Mill hits on this conception when he attempts to draw a line between
logic and psychology, and says: ‘The properties of thought which concern
logic are some of its contingent properties, those namely on the presence of
which depends good thinking as distinguished from bad’ (An Examination
of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy, p. 462). In his further statements, he
repeatedly calls logic the (psychologically conceived) ‘theory’ or ‘philosophy
of evidence’ (op. cit. pp. 473, 475–6, 478) he was of course not immediately
concerned with the propositions of pure logic. In Germany this point of
view occasionally crops up in Sigwart. ‘Logic’, he says, ‘can only proceed by
becoming conscious of the way this subjective feeling of necessity [the ‘inner
feeling’ of the evident of our previous paragraph] makes its appearance, and
then expressing these conditions in a general manner’ (Logik, 1, ed. 2, p. 16).

60 Prolegomena to pure logic

Many statements of Wundt’s tend in a similar direction. We read, e.g., in his
Logik that ‘the properties of self-evidence and universal validity involved in
certain thought-connections, permit us to derive the logical from the psychological laws of thought’. The normative character of the former ‘has its
sole foundation in the fact that certain psychological thought-connections
actually do have self-evidence and universal validity, without which it would
not be possible for us to approach thought with the demand that it should
satisfy the conditions of the self-evident and universally valid’. ‘The conditions that must themselves be fulﬁlled if we are to have self-evidence and
universal validity are called the logical laws of thought.’ But Wundt emphasizes that ‘psychological thinking is always the more comprehensive form of
thinking’.5
In the logical literature at the end of last century the interpretation of
logic as a practically applied psychology of the inwardly evident certainly
became more penetrating and more widely entertained. The Logik of Höﬂer
and Meinong here deserves special mention, since it may be regarded as the
ﬁrst properly carried out attempt to make a thorough, consistent use of
the notion of the psychology of inward evidence over the whole ﬁeld of logic.
Höﬂer says that the main task of logic is the investigation of ‘those laws,
primarily psychological, which express the dependence of emergent inward
evidence on the particular properties of our presentations and judgements’
(Logik, Vienna 1890, p. 16). ‘Among all actually given thought-phenomena,
or even such as we can conceive possible, logic must pick out the types or
forms of thinking to which inner evidence attaches directly, or which are
necessary conditions for the emergence of inner evidence’ (op. cit. p. 17).
The seriousness of such psychologism is shown by the rest of the treatment.
Thus the method of logic, in its concern with the theoretical groundwork of
correct thinking, is said to be the same method that psychology applies to
all mental phenomena: it must describe such phenomena, in this case those
of correct thinking, and reduce them as far as may be to simple laws, i.e.
explain more complex laws by way of simple ones (op. cit. p. 18). Further
on, one reads that the logical doctrine of the syllogism is given the task of
‘formulating the laws, which tell us what features in our premisses determine whether a certain judgement can be deduced from them with inward
evidence’. Etc. etc.

§50 Transformation of logical propositions into
equivalent propositions about the ideal conditions for
evidence of judgement. The resultant propositions are
not psychological
We turn to criticism. We are far from regarding as unobjectionable the
nowadays commonplace, but far from clear assumption with which the
argument starts, that all truth lies in our judgements. We do not of course

The psychologistic prejudices

61

doubt that to know truth and to utter it justiﬁably, presupposes the prior
seeing of it. Nor do we doubt that logic as a technology must look into the
psychological conditions in which inner evidence illuminates our judgements.
We may even go a further step in the direction of the conception we are
refuting. While we seek to preserve the distinction between purely logical
and methodological propositions, we expressly concede that the former have
a relation to the psychological datum of inner evidence, that they in a sense
state its psychological conditions.
Such a relation must, however, be regarded as purely ideal and indirect.
The pure laws of logic say absolutely nothing about inner evidence or its
conditions. We can show, we hold, that they only achieve this relation through
a process of application or transformation, the same sort of process, in fact,
through which every purely conceptual law permits application to a generally conceived realm of empirical cases. The propositions about inner evidence
which arise in this manner keep their a priori character, and the conditions
of inner evidence that they assert bear no trace of the psychological or the
real. They are purely conceptual propositions, transformable, as in every
like case, into statements about ideal incompatibilities or possibilities.
A little reﬂection will make matters clear. Every law of pure logic permits
of an (inwardly evident) transformation, possible a priori, which allows one
to read off certain propositions about inward evidence, certain conditions
of inward evidence, from it. The combined principles of contradiction and
excluded middle are certainly equivalents to the proposition: One and only
one of two mutually contradictory judgements can manifest inner evidence.6
The mood Barbara is likewise certainly equivalent to the proposition: The
inner evidence of the necessary truth of a proposition of the form All A’s are
C’s (more precisely, its truth as a necessary consequence), may appear in a
syllogizing act whose premisses are of the forms All A’s are B’s and All B’s
are C’s. The like holds of every proposition of pure logic. Understandably so,
since there evidently is a general equivalence between the proposition A is
true and It is possible for anyone to judge A to be true in an inwardly evident
manner. The propositions, therefore, whose sense lies in stating what necessarily is involved in the notion of truth, that the truth of propositions of certain
forms determines the truth of propositions of corresponding other forms,
can certainly be transformed into equivalent propositions which connect the
possible emergence of inner evidence with the forms of our judgements.
Our insight into such connections will, however, provide us with the means
to refute the attempt to swallow up pure logic in a psychology of inner
evidence. In itself, plainly, the proposition A is true does not state the same
thing as the equivalent proposition It is possible for anyone and everyone to
judge that A is the case. The former says nothing about anyone’s judgement, not
even about judgements of anyone in general. The position here resembles
that of propositions of pure mathematics. The statement that a + b = b + a
states that the numerical value of the sum of two numbers is independent

62 Prolegomena to pure logic

of their position in such a sum, but it says nothing about anyone’s acts
of counting or addition. The latter ﬁrst enters the picture in an inwardly
evident, equivalent transformation. It is an a priori truth that no number
can be given in concreto unless we count, and no sum unless we add.
But even when we abandon the original forms of the propositions of
pure logic, and turn them into corresponding equivalents regarding inward
evidence, nothing results which psychology could claim as its own. Psychology is an empirical science, the science of mental facts, and psychological
possibility is accordingly a case of real possibility. Such possibilities of inner
evidence are, however, real ones, and what is psychologically impossible
may very well be ideally possible. The solution of the generalized ‘3-body
problem’, or n-body problem’ may transcend all human cognitive capacity,
but the problem has a solution, and the inner evidence which relates to it
is therefore possible. There are decimal numbers with trillions of places, and
there are truths relating to them. No one, however, can actually imagine
such numbers, nor do the additions, multiplications etc., relating to them.
Inward evidence is here a psychological impossible, yet, ideally speaking, it
undoubtedly represents a possible state of mind.
The turning of the notion of truth into the notion of the possibility of
evident judgement has its analogue in the relation of the concepts Individual
Being and Possibility of Perception. The equivalence of these concepts, if
by ‘perception’ we mean adequate perception, is undeniable. A perception is
accordingly possible, in which the whole world, with the endless abundance
of its bodies, is perceived at one glance. But this ideal possibility is of course
no real possibility, we could not attribute it to any empirical subject, particularly since such a vision would be an endless continuum of vision: unitarily
conceived, it would be a Kantian Idea.
Though we stress the ideality of the possibilities of evident judgement
which can be derived from logical principles, and which we see to reveal
their a priori validity in cases of apodeictic self-evidence, we do not deny
their psychological utility. If we take the law that, out of two contradictory
propositions, one is true and one is false, and deduce from it the truth that,
one only out of every pair of possible contradictory judgements can have
the character of inward evidence, we may note this to be a self-evidently
correct deduction, if self-evidence be deﬁned as the experience in which the
correctness of his judgement is brought home to a judging subject, the new
proposition utters a truth about the compatibilities or incompatibilities of
certain mental experiences. In this manner, however, every proposition of pure
mathematics tells us something about possible and impossible happenings
in the mental realm. No empirical enumeration or calculation, no mental
act of algebraical transformation or geometrical construction, is possible
which conﬂicts with the ideal laws of mathematics. These laws accordingly
have a psychological use. We can read off from each of them a priori
possibilities and impossibilities relating to certain sorts of mental acts, acts

The psychologistic prejudices

63

of counting, of additive and multiplicative combination etc. These laws are
not thereby made into psychological laws. Psychology, the natural science
concerned with what we mentally live through, has to look into the natural
conditions of our experience. In its ﬁeld are speciﬁcally to be found the
empirically real relationships of our mathematical and logical activities, whose
ideal relations and laws make up an independent realm. This latter realm is
set up in purely universal propositions, made up out of ‘concepts’ which are
not class-concepts of mental acts, but ideal concepts of essence, each with its
concrete foundation in such mental acts or in their objective correlates. The
number Three, the Truth named after Pythagoras etc., are, as our discussion
showed, neither empirical singulars nor classes of singulars: they are ideal
objects ideationally apprehended in the correlates of our acts of counting, of
inwardly evident judging etc.
In relation to inner evidence, psychology has therefore merely the task
of tracking down the natural conditions of the experiences which fall under
this rubric, of investigating the real contexts in which, as experience shows,
inward evidence arises and perishes. Such natural conditions are concentration of interest, a certain mental freshness, practice etc. Their investigation
does not lead to knowledge which is exact in its content, to inwardly evident, truly lawlike generalizations, but only to vague, empirical generalizations.
The inward evidence of our judgements does not merely depend on such
psychological conditions, conditions that one might also call external and
empirical, since they are rooted not purely in the speciﬁc form and matter
of our judgement, but in its empirical context in mental life: it depends also
on ideal conditions. Each truth stands as an ideal unit over against an
endless, unbounded possibility of correct statements which have its form
and its matter in common. Each actual judgement, which belongs to this
ideal manifold, will fulﬁl, either in its mere form or in its matter, the ideal
conditions for its own possible inward evidence. The laws of pure logic are
truths rooted in the concept of truth, and in concepts essentially related
to this concept. They state, in relation to possible acts of judgement, and
on the basis of their mere form, the ideal conditions of the possibility or
impossibility of their inner evidence. Of these two sorts of conditions of the
inwardly evident, the former relates to the special constitution of the sorts
of psychical being which the psychology of the period recognizes, psychological induction being limited by experience. The other conditions, however, have the character of ideal laws, and hold generally for every possible
consciousness.

§51 The decisive points in this dispute
A ﬁnal clearing-up of our present dispute depends likewise on a correct
discernment of the most fundamental of epistemological distinctions, the
distinction between the real and the ideal, or the correct discernment of all

64 Prolegomena to pure logic

the distinctions into which this distinction can be analysed. We are here
concerned with the repeatedly stressed distinctions between real and ideal
truths, laws, sciences, between real and ideal (individual and speciﬁc) generalities and also singularities etc. Everyone, no doubt, has some acquaintance
with these distinctions: even so extreme an empiricist as Hume draws a
fundamental distinction between ‘relations of ideas’ and ‘matters of fact’,
a distinction which the great idealist Leibniz drew before him, using the
rubrics vérités de raison and vérités de fait. To draw an epistemologically
important distinction does not, however, mean that one has as yet grasped
its epistemological essence. One must clearly grasp what the ideal is, both
intrinsically and in its relation to the real, how this ideal stands to the real,
how it can be immanent in it and so come to knowledge. The basic question
is whether ideal objects of thought are – to use the prevailing jargon – mere
pointers to ‘thought-economies’, verbal abbreviations whose true content
merely reduces to individual, singular experiences, mere presentations and
judgements concerning individual facts, or whether the idealist is right in
holding that such an empiricistic doctrine, nebulous in its generality, can
indeed be uttered, but in no wise thought out, that all attempts to reduce
ideal unities to real singulars are involved in hopeless absurdities, that its
splintering of concepts into a range of singulars, without a concept to unify
such a range in our thought, cannot be thought etc.
The understanding of our distinction between the real and the ideal ‘theory
of inner evidence’ presupposes, on the other hand, correct concepts of inner
evidence and truth. In the psychologistic literature of the last decades we
have seen inner evidence spoken of as a casual feeling which attends on
certain judgements, and is absent from others, which at best has a universally human linkage with certain judgements and not with others, a linkage
in every normal human being in normal circumstances of judgement. There
are certain normal circumstances in which every normal person feels selfevidence in connection with the proposition 2 + 1 = 1 + 2, just as he feels
pain when he gets burnt. One might then well ask what gives such a special
feeling authority, how it manages to guarantee the truth of our judgement,
‘impress the stamp of truth’ on it, ‘proclaim its truth’, or whatever other metaphor one cares to use. One might also ask what such vague talk of normal
endowment and normal circumstances precisely covers, and might point to
the fact that even this recourse to normality will not make inwardly evident
judgements coincide with true ones. It is in the last resort undeniable that
even the normal man in normal circumstances must pass, in an unnumbered
majority of cases, possible correct judgements which lack inner evidence.
One would surely not wish to conceive the ‘normality’ in question in such a
way that no actual human being, and no possible human being living in our
ﬁnite natural conditions, could be called ‘normal’.
Empiricism altogether misunderstands the relation between the ideal and
the real: it likewise misunderstands the relation between truth and inner
evidence. Inner evidence is no accessory feeling, either casually attached, or

The psychologistic prejudices

65

attached by natural necessity, to certain judgements. It is not the sort of
mental character that simply lets itself be attached to any and every judgement of a certain class, i.e. the so-called ‘true’ judgements, so that the
phenomenological content of such a judgement, considered in and for itself,
would be the same whether or not it had this character. The situation is not
at all like the way in which we like to conceive of the connection between
sensations and the feelings which relate to them: two persons, we think,
have the same sensations, but are differently affected in their feelings. Inner
evidence is rather nothing but the ‘experience’ of truth. Truth is of course
only experienced in the sense in which something ideal can be an experience
in a real act. Otherwise put: Truth is an Idea, whose particular case is an actual
experience in the inwardly evident judgement. The inwardly evident judgement is, however, an experience of primal givenness: the non-self-evident
judgement stands to it much as the arbitrary positing of an object in imagination stands to its adequate perception. A thing adequately perceived is
not a thing merely meant in some manner or other: it is a thing primarily
given in our act, and as what we mean it, i.e. as itself given and grasped
without residue. In like fashion what is self-evidently judged is not merely
judged (meant in a judging, assertive, afﬁrmative manner) but is given in
the judgement-experience as itself present – present in the sense in which a
state of affairs, meant in this or that manner, according to its kind, whether
singular or general, empirical or ideal etc., can be ‘present’. The analogy
which connects all experiences of primal givenness, then leads to analogous
ways of speaking, and inner evidence is called a seeing, a grasping of the
self-given (true) state of affairs, or, as we say with tempting equivocation, of
the truth. And, as in the realm of perception, the unseen does not at all
coincide with the nonexistent, so lack of inward evidence does not amount
to untruth. The experience of the agreement between meaning and what is
itself present, meant, between the actual sense of an assertion and the selfgiven state of affairs, is inward evidence: the Idea of this agreement is truth,
whose ideality is also its objectivity. It is not a chance fact that a propositional
thought, occurring here and now, agrees with a given state of affairs: the
agreement rather holds between a self-identical propositional meaning, and
a self-identical state of affairs. ‘Validity’ or ‘objectivity’, and their opposites,
do not pertain to an assertion as a particular temporal experience, but to the
assertion in specie, to the pure, self-identical assertion 2 × 2 = 4 etc.
This conception alone accords with the fact that it makes no difference
whether we perform a judgement (a judgement with the content, the meaning J) insightfully, or whether we have insight into the truth, the being of J.
We accordingly also have insight into the fact that no one’s insight can be at
variance with our own (to the extent that either of us really has insight).
This has its source in the essential relation between the experience of truth
and truth. Our conception alone escapes the doubt which the conception of
inner evidence as a casually connected feeling never can escape, and which
plainly amounts to a complete scepticism: the doubt whether, when we have

66 Prolegomena to pure logic

insight that J is the case, another might not have the insight that J′, incompatible with J, is the case, that insights in general might not clash with
insights, without a hope of settlement. We understand, accordingly, why the
‘feeling’ of inner evidence has no other essential precondition but the truth
of the judged content in question. It is obvious that where there is nothing,
nothing can be seen, but it is no less obvious that where there is no truth,
there can be no seeing something to be true, i.e. no inward evidence (cf.
Investigation , chapter 5).

Chapter 10

End of our critical treatments

67

End of our critical treatments

§61 Need for special investigations to provide an
epistemological justification and partial realization of
the Idea of pure logic
The authority of Leibniz must, however, count even less for us than that of
Kant or Herbart, since he could not give to his great intentions the weight
of completed achievements. He belongs to a past age, beyond which modern
science feels that it has travelled a long way. Authorities do not in fact carry
much weight as opposed to the broad advance of a science supposedly rich
and secure in its results. Their inﬂuence must be less, in so far as they lack
a sufﬁciently clariﬁed, positively elaborated concept of the discipline in
question. Clearly, if we do not want to stick half way, and to run the risk
that our critical reﬂections may be barren, we must take up the task of constructing the Idea of pure logic on a sufﬁciently broad basis. Only in a series
of meaty individual treatments, which will provide a more precise idea of
the content and character of the essential logical researches, and which will
work out the notion of logic more deﬁnitely, can one remove the prejudice
which sees logic as an insigniﬁcant ﬁeld of more or less trivial statements. As
against this, we shall see that our discipline extends far and wide, not merely
in respect of its content of systematic theories, but above all in regard to the
difﬁcult and important investigations needed for its philosophical foundation and assessment.
But even the putative triviality of the ﬁeld of purely logical truths, would
in itself be no argument for its treatment as a mere aid towards a logical
technology. The interests of pure theory require us to treat what constitutes
a uniﬁed whole of theory in a theoretically closed manner, and not as a mere
aid towards external ends. Our investigations so far have, we hope, made
plain that a correct grasp of the essence of pure logic, and of its unique
position in relation to all other sciences, is one of the most important questions in the whole of epistemology. If this is plain, it is likewise of vital
interest to this fundamental philosophical science, that pure logic should be
fully expounded in purity and independence. Epistemology must, of course,

68 Prolegomena to pure logic

not be taken to be a discipline following upon or coinciding with metaphysics, but one which precedes metaphysics, as it precedes psychology and all
other disciplines.

Appendix
References to F. A. Lange and B. Bolzano
Wide as is the gulf which divides my logic from F. A. Lange’s, I am in
agreement with him, and regard him as having done the discipline a service,
in that, in a period when pure logic was mainly despised, he deﬁnitely stood
out for the view that ‘science may expect important advances from attempts
at a separate treatment of the purely formal elements of logic’ (Logische
Studien, p. 1). Our agreement extends further: in the most general features it
also applies to the Idea of the discipline, which Lange could not indeed
bring to essential clarity. He has good grounds for regarding the hiving off
of pure logic as the hiving off of the doctrines which he calls ‘the apodeictic
element in logic’, i.e. ‘the doctrines which, like mathematical theorems, can
be developed in an absolutely cogent manner’. His next remarks are well
worth remembering:
The mere fact of the presence of cogent truths is so important, that every
trace of such truths must be carefully followed up. To omit such an
investigation on account of the small value of formal logic, or its inadequacy as a theory of human thought, would have to be rejected from
this point of view as a confusion of theoretical with practical aims. Such
an objection would be as if a chemist refused to analyse a compound
because in its compounded state it was very valuable, whereas its single
constituents were unlikely to have any value.
(op. cit. p. 7 f.)
He is just as right in another passage: ‘Formal logic as an apodeictic science,
has a value totally independent of its validity: every system of truths which
hold a priori, deserves the highest respect’ (op. cit. p. 127).
While Lange warmly supported the Idea of a purely formal logic, he had
no notion that this Idea had already been realized to a relatively high degree.
I am of course not referring to the many expositions of formal logic, which
ﬂourished especially in the schools of Kant and Herbart, and which did so
little to live up to their own claims. I am referring to Bernhard Bolzano’s
Wissenschaftslehre, published in 1837, a work which, in its treatment of the
logical ‘theory of elements’, far surpasses everything that world-literature
has to offer in the way of a systematic sketch of logic. Bolzano did not, of
course, expressly discuss or support any independent demarcation of pure
logic in our sense, but he provided one de facto in the ﬁrst two volumes of

End of our critical treatments

69

his work, in his discussions of what underlay a Wissenschaftslehre or theory
of science in the sense of his conception; he did so with such purity and
scientiﬁc strictness, and with such a rich store of original, scientiﬁcally conﬁrmed and ever fruitful thoughts, that we must count him as one of the
greatest logicians of all time. He must be placed historically in fairly close
proximity to Leibniz, with whom he shares important thoughts and fundamental conceptions, and to whom he is also philosophically akin in other respects. Even he, however, did not quite exhaust the rich inspiration of Leibniz’s
logical intuitions, especially not in regard to mathematical syllogistics and
to mathesis universalis. Too few of Leibniz’s posthumous writings were, however, known at the time, and there was no ‘formal’ mathematics or theory of
manifolds to provide a key to their understanding.
In each line of his wonderful book, Bolzano shows himself to be an acute
mathematician, who lets the same spirit of scientiﬁc strictness rule in logic
which he himself ﬁrst introduced into the theoretical treatment of the basic
concepts and propositions of mathematical analysis, which thereby acquired
a new foundation. For this the history of mathematics has not forgotten to
grant him a famous place. Of the ambiguous profundity of that systematic
philosophy, which rather aimed at thinking out world-conceptions and a worldwisdom, and which hindered the progress of scientiﬁc philosophy so badly
by its unholy blend of discordant intentions, Bolzano – the contemporary of
Hegel – shows no trace. His thought-patterns are of mathematical straightforwardness and plainness, but also of mathematical clearness and strictness. Only when one has gone more deeply into the sense and aim of these
patterns throughout the whole discipline, does one ﬁnd what great mental
work and achievement lie hidden behind plain statements and formularized
expositions. To philosophers bred in the prejudices, in the thought- and
speech-habits of the idealistic schools – not all of us have completely outgrown
such inﬂuences – such a scientiﬁc approach readily seems shallow and void of
ideas, as well as ponderous and pedantic. Logic as a science must, however,
be built upon Bolzano’s work, and must learn from him its need for mathematical acuteness in distinctions, for mathematical exactness in theories. It
will then reach a new standpoint for judging the mathematicizing theories of
logic, which mathematicians, quite unperturbed by philosophic scorn, are so
successfully constructing. These theories altogether conform to the spirit of
Bolzano’s logic, though Bolzano had not an inkling of them. It will at least
be impossible for a future historian of logic to be so wrong as the otherwise
thorough Ueberweg, who treats a work of the rank of the Wissenschaftslehre
on a level with – Knigge’s Logic for Females (Logik für Frauenzimmer).1
Much as Bolzano’s achievement is ‘cast in one piece’, it cannot be regarded (as such a deeply honest thinker would be the ﬁrst to admit) as in
any way ﬁnal. To mention only one point, one particularly feels his defects
in epistemological directions. There are either no investigations, or else only
quite insufﬁcient ones, which give genuine philosophical intelligibility to

70 Prolegomena to pure logic

logical thought-achievements, and so provide a philosophical estimate of
logic as a discipline. Such questions can be evaded by a thinker who, like a
mathematician, is building theories upon theories, without having to bother
himself about questions of underlying principle. They cannot be evaded
by someone who undertakes to make clear, to those who either fail to see
or to admit a discipline’s validity, or who mix up essential tasks with quite
heterogeneous ones, what the inherent justiﬁcation of such a discipline really is, and what the nature of its tasks and objects may be. Our comparison
of these present Logical Investigations with Bolzano’s work is meant to
make clear, not that our Investigations are in any sense mere commentaries
upon, or critically improved expositions of, Bolzano’s thought-patterns, but
that they have been crucially stimulated by Bolzano (as also by Lotze).

Chapter 11

The idea of pure logic

Wishing to gain a provisional image, sketched with a few characteristic
touches, of the goal aimed at by the individual discussions which follow
these Prolegomena, we shall now try to bring conceptual clarity to that idea
of pure logic, for which our critical discussions up to this point have more
or less prepared us.

§62 The unity of science. The interconnection of
things and the interconnection of truths
Science is, in the ﬁrst place a uniﬁed item in anthropology: it is a unity
of acts of thinking, of thought-dispositions, as well as of certain external
arrangements pertinent thereto. What makes this uniﬁed whole anthropological, and what especially makes it psychological, are not here our concern.
We are rather interested in what makes science science, which is certainly
not its psychology, nor any real context into which acts of thought are ﬁtted,
but a certain objective or ideal interconnection which gives these acts a
unitary objective relevance, and, in such unitary relevance, an ideal validity.
More deﬁniteness and clearness are, however, needed at this point. Two
meanings can be attached to this objective interconnection which ideally
pervades scientiﬁc thought, and which gives ‘unity’ to such thought, and so
to science as such: it can be understood as an interconnection of the things to
which our thought-experiences (actual or possible) are intentionally directed,
or, on the other hand, as an interconnection of truths, in which this unity of
things comes to count objectively as being what it is. These two things are
given together a priori, and are mutually inseparable. Nothing can be without being thus or thus determined, and that it is, and that it is thus and thus
determined, is the self-subsistent truth which is the necessary correlate of the
self-subsistent being. What holds of single truths, or single states of affairs,
plainly also holds of interconnections of truths or of states of affairs. This
self-evident inseparability is not, however, identity. In these truths or interconnections of truths the actual existence of things and of interconnections
of things ﬁnds expression. But the interconnections of truths differ from the

72 Prolegomena to pure logic

interconnections of things, which are ‘truly’ in the former; this at once
appears in the fact that truths which hold of truths do not coincide with
truths that hold of the things posited in such truths.
To forestall misunderstandings, I must expressly emphasize the fact that I
use the words ‘objectivity’, ‘object’, ‘thing’ etc., always in the widest sense,
in accordance, therefore, with my preferred sense of the term ‘knowledge’.
An object of knowledge may as readily be what is real as what is ideal, a
thing or an event or a species of a mathematical relation, a case of being or
of what ought to be. This applies automatically to expressions like ‘uniﬁed
objectivity’, ‘interconnection of things’ etc.
Both sorts of unity are given to us, and can only by abstraction be thought
apart, in judgement or, more precisely, in knowledge – the unity of objectivity, on the one hand, and of truth, on the other. The expression ‘knowledge’
is wide enough to cover both simple acts of knowing, as well as logically
uniﬁed interconnections of knowledge, however complicated: either of these,
considered as a whole, is a cognitive act. If now we perform an act of
cognition, or, as I prefer to express it, live in one, we are ‘concerned with the
object’ that it, in its cognitive fashion, means and postulates. If this act is
one of knowing in the strictest sense, i.e. if our judgement is inwardly evident, then its object is given in primal fashion (originär). The state of affairs
comes before us, not merely putatively, but as actually before our eyes, and
in it the object itself, as the object that it is, i.e. just as it is intended in this
act of knowing and not otherwise, as bearer of such and such properties, as
the term of such relations etc. It is not merely putatively, but actually thus,
and as actually thus it is given to our knowledge, which means that it is not
merely thought ( judged) but known to be such. Otherwise put, its being
thus is a truth actually realized, individualized in the experience of the
inwardly evident judgement. If we reﬂect on this individualization, we perform an ideational abstraction, and the truth itself, instead of our former
object, becomes our apprehended object. We hereby apprehend the truth as
the ideal correlate of the transient subjective act of knowledge, as standing
opposed in its unity to the unlimited multitude of possible acts of knowing,
and of knowing individuals.
To the interconnections of knowledge there ideally correspond interconnections of truths. Suitably understood, these are not merely complexes of
truths, but complex truths, which therefore themselves in their totality fall
under the concept of truth. There also the sciences belong, the word understood objectively in the sense of uniﬁed truth. In the general correlation
which subsists between truth and objectivity, there is a unitary objectivity
which corresponds to the unity of truth in one and the same science: this
is the unity of the scientiﬁc ﬁeld. In relation to this, all the singular truths
of the same science belong together in their subject-matter, an expression
which, as we shall see later, seems to be here used in a wider sense than
usual.

The idea of pure logic

73

§63 Continuation. The unity of theory
We may now ask what constitutes the unity of a science, and therewith the
unity of its ﬁeld. For not every putting of truths together in a single association of truths, which might remain an entirely external one, constitutes a
science. To a science, as we said in our ﬁrst chapter,1 a certain uniﬁed interconnection of demonstration pertains. This too, however, is not enough: it
points to demonstration, to proof as something essentially pertaining to the
Idea of Science, but fails to say what sort of unity of proof constitutes a
science.
To reach clearness, we begin by making certain general pronouncements.
Scientiﬁc knowledge is, as such, grounded knowledge. To know the ground
of anything means to see the necessity of its being so and so. Necessity as an
objective predicate of a truth (which is then called a necessary truth) is
tantamount to the law-governed validity of the state of affairs in question.
To see a state of affairs as a matter of law is to see its truth as necessarily
obtaining, and to have knowledge of the ground of the state of affairs or
of its truth: all these are equivalent expressions.2 A natural equivocation, of
course, leads us to call every general truth that itself utters a law, a necessary truth. Corresponding to our ﬁrst deﬁned sense, it would have been
better to call it the explanatory ground of a law, from which a class of
necessary truths follows.
Truths divide into individual and general truths. The former contain (whether
explicitly or implicitly) assertions regarding the actual existence of individual
singulars, whereas the latter are completely free from this, and only permit
us to infer (purely from concepts) the possible existence of what is individual.
Individual truths are as such contingent. If in their case one speaks of
a grounded explanation, one is concerned with a proof of their necessity
under certain presupposed circumstances. If the interconnection of one fact
with others is one of law, then its existence, resting on the laws which
govern interconnections of the sort in question, and on the assumption of
the pertinent circumstances, is determined as a necessary existence.
If we are not dealing with the proof of a factual, but of a general truth
(which again has the character of a law in respect of its possible application
to facts falling under it) we are referred to certain general laws, which,
by way of specialization (not individualization) and deductive consequence
yield the proposition to be proved. The proof of general laws necessarily
leads to certain laws which in their essence, i.e. intrinsically, and not merely
subjectively or anthropologically, are not further proveable. These are called
basic laws. The systematic unity of the ideally closed sum total of laws
resting on one basic legality (Gesetzlichkeit) as their ﬁnal ground, an arising
out of it through systematic deduction, is the unity of a systematically complete theory. This basic legality may here either consist of one basic law or a
conjunction of homogeneous basic laws.

74 Prolegomena to pure logic

We possess theories in this strict sense in universal arithmetic, in geometry, in analytical mechanics, in mathematical astronomy etc. Our concept
of theory is usually a relative one, i.e. a theory is relative to a multiplicity of
single items that it governs, for which it provides the explanatory grounds.
Universal arithmetic gives us an explanatory theory for numerical and
concrete number-propositions, analytical mechanics for mechanical facts,
mathematical astronomy for the facts of gravitation etc. The possibility of
taking on the function of explanation is an obvious consequence of the
essence of a theory in our absolute sense. In a looser sense, we mean by a
theory a deductive system in which the last grounds are not basic laws in the
strict sense of the word, but, as genuine grounds, take us closer to these. In
the gradations of a closed theory, a theory in this relaxed sense forms a step.
We also note the following difference: every explanatory interconnection
is deductive, but not every deductive interconnection is explanatory. All
grounds are premisses, but not all premisses are grounds. Every deduction is
indeed necessary, i.e. it obeys laws: but that its conclusions follow according
to laws (the laws of inference) does not mean that they follow from laws
which in a pregnant sense serve to ‘ground’ them. One tends, indeed, to call
every premiss, and especially a universal one, a ‘ground’ for the consequences
which ﬂow from it, a noteworthy equivocation.

§65 The question as to the ideal conditions of
the possibility of science or of theory in general.
A. The question as it relates to actual knowledge
We now raise an important question as to the ‘conditions of the possibility
of science in general’. Since the essential aim of scientiﬁc knowledge can
only be achieved through theory, in the strict sense of the nomological
sciences, we replace our question by a question as to the conditions of the
possibility of theory in general. A theory as such consists of truths, and its
form of connection is a deductive one. To answer our question is therefore
also to answer the more general question as to the conditions of the possibility of truth in general, and again of deductive unity in general. The historical
echoes in the form of our question are of course intentional. We are plainly
concerned with a quite necessary generalization of the question as to the
‘conditions of the possibility of experience’ (Erfahrung). The unity of an
experience is for Kant the unity of objective legality: it falls, therefore, under
the concept of theoretical unity.
The sense of our question needs, however, to be more precisely ﬁxed. It
might very well be at ﬁrst understood in the subjective sense, in which case
it would be better expressed as a question as to the conditions of the possibility of theoretical knowledge in general, or, more generally, of inference
in general or knowledge in general, and in the case of any possible human

The idea of pure logic

75

being. Such conditions are in part real, in part ideal. We shall ignore the
former, the psychological conditions. Naturally the possibility of knowledge
in a psychological regard embraces all the causal conditions on which our
thinking depends. Ideal conditions for the possibility of knowledge may, as
said before,3 be of two sorts. They are either noetic conditions which have
their grounds, a priori, in the Idea of Knowledge as such, without any regard
to the empirical peculiarity of human knowledge as psychologically conditioned, or they are purely logical conditions, i.e. they are grounded purely in
the ‘content’ of our knowledge. It is evident a priori, as regards the former,
that thinking subjects must be in general able to perform, e.g., all the sorts
of acts in which theoretical knowledge is made real. We must, in particular,
as thinking beings, be able to see propositions as truths, and to see truths as
consequences of other truths, and again to see laws as such, to see laws as
explanatory grounds, and to see them as ultimate principles etc. But it is also,
on the other hand, inwardly evident that truths are what they are, and that,
in particular, laws, grounds, principles are what they are, whether we have
insight into them or not. Since they do not hold in so far as we have insight
into them, but we can only have insight into them in so far as they hold, they
must be regarded as objective or ideal conditions of the possibility of our
knowledge of them. A priori laws, accordingly, relating to truth as such, to
deduction as such and to theory as such (i.e. to the universal essence of these
ideal unities) must be characterized as laws which express the conditions for
knowledge in general, or for deductive and theoretical knowledge in general,
conditions which have their ‘pure’ foundation is the ‘content’ of knowledge.
Plainly we are here concerned with a priori conditions of knowledge,
which can be discussed and investigated apart from all relation to the thinking subject and to the Idea of Subjectivity in science. The laws in question
have a meaning-content which is quite free from such relation, they do not
talk, even in ideal fashion, of knowing, judging, inferring, representing,
proving etc., but of truth, concept, proposition, syllogism, ground and consequent etc., as we fully said above (§47 excised). Obviously these laws may
undergo self-evident transformations through which they acquire an express
relation to knowledge and the knowing subject, and now themselves pronounce on real possibilities of knowledge. Here as elsewhere, a priori assertions regarding ideal possibilities arise through the transferred application
of ideal relationships (expressed in purely general propositions) to empirical
instances (cf. the arithmetical example in §23 above).
The ideal conditions of knowledge which we have called ‘noetic’ as
opposed to those which are logically objective, are, basically, no more than
such modiﬁcations of the insights, the laws which pertain to the pure content of knowledge, as render them fruitful for the criticism of knowledge,
and, by further modiﬁcations, for practical, logical normativity. For the
normative modiﬁcations of the laws of pure logic, which we spoke of above,
also come in here.

76 Prolegomena to pure logic

§66 B. The question as it relates to the content
of knowledge
Our treatment has shown that questions as to the ideal conditions of
the possibility of knowledge in general, and of theoretical knowledge in
particular, ultimately lead us back to certain laws, whose roots are to be
found purely in the content of knowledge, or of the categorial concepts that
it falls under, and which are so abstract that they contain no reference to
knowledge as an act of a knowing subject. These laws (or the categorial
concepts which enter into them) are what are to be understood as constituting the conditions of the possibility of theory in general, in the objectively
ideal sense. For it is possible to raise questions as to the conditions of
possibility, not only in regard to theoretical knowledge, as we have so far
done, but also in regard to its content, i.e. we can raise them directly in
regard to theory itself. We then understand by ‘theory’, let us again stress, a
certain ideal content of possible knowledge, just as in the case of ‘truth’,
‘law’ etc. There is a single truth, which corresponds to the multitude of
individual acts of knowledge having the same content, which is just their
ideally identical content. In like manner, the ideally identical content of a
theory corresponds to the multitude of individual knowledge-combinations,
in each of which – whether occurring now or then, in these subject or in
those – the same theory comes to be known. It is accordingly not made up of
acts but of purely ideal elements, of truths, and that in purely ideal forms,
those of ground and consequent.
If we now directly relate our question as to conditions of possibility,
to theory in the objective sense and to theory in general, such a possibility
can only have the sense which applies to other objects of pure conception.
From such objects, we are led back to concepts, and ‘possibility’ means no
more than the ‘obtaining’ (Geltung) or rather essentiality (Wesenhaftigkeit) of
the concepts in question. This is what is often called the ‘reality’ as opposed
to the ‘imaginariness’ of concepts, which latter could better be called
‘essencelessness’. In such a sense, one speaks of real deﬁnitions which guarantee the possibility, the ‘obtaining’, the reality of the deﬁned concept, and
again of the opposition between real and imaginary numbers, geometrical
ﬁgures etc. Talk of possibility in regard to concepts becomes equivocal
through a transfer. What is in an authentic sense possible is the existence of
objects falling under the relevant concepts, a possibility guaranteed a priori
through knowledge of conceptual essence, which ﬂashes upon us, e.g., as
the result of such an object’s being intuitively presented. The essentiality
of the concept is then likewise spoken of as a possibility in a transferred
sense.
In this connection questions as to the possibility of a theory as such, and
as to the conditions on which such possibility depends, gain an easily grasped

The idea of pure logic

77

sense. The possibility or essentiality of a theory in general is assured by our
perspicuous knowledge of some deﬁnite theory. The wider question will
however be: What are the universal, law-governed conditions of this possibility of theory in general? What therefore constitutes the ideal essence of
theory as such? What are the primitive ‘possibilities’ out of which the possibility of theory is constituted, or, what is the same, what are the primitive
essential concepts out of which the concept of theory, itself an essential
concept, is constituted? And further: What are the pure laws which, rooted
in these concepts, impart unity to all theory as such, laws which pertain to
the form of theory as such, and which determine, in a priori fashion, the
possible (essential) modiﬁcations or species of theory?
If these ideal concepts or laws delimit the possibility of theory in general,
if, in other words, they express what essentially pertains to the Idea of Theory, it immediately follows that each putative theory only is a theory to the
extent to which it accords with these concepts or laws. The logical justiﬁcation of a concept, i.e. of its ideal possibility, is achieved by going back to its
intuitive or deducible essence. Logical justiﬁcation of a given theory as such,
i.e. justiﬁcation in virtue of its pure form, demands that we go back to the
essence of its form, and so to the concepts and laws which are ideal constituents of theory in general (the ‘conditions of its possibility’), which regulate,
in a priori, deductive fashion, all specialization of the Idea of Theory in its
possible kinds. Things are here as they are in the wider ﬁeld of deduction,
e.g. in the case of simple syllogisms. Though they may be intrinsically illuminated by insight, they none the less receive their ﬁnal, deepest justiﬁcation
by recourse to the formal, syllogistic law which imparts insight into the a
priori ground of syllogistic interconnection. The same holds in the case of
any deduction, however complicated, and especially in the case of a theory.
In perspicuous, theoretical thought we gain insight into the grounds of some
state of affairs explained: but the deeper-going insight into the essence of the
theoretical linkage which itself constitutes the theoretical content of such
thought, and the a priori laws on which such thought-achievement depends,
are ﬁrst reached when we track down the form, the law, and the interweavings
of theory, at the quite different level of knowledge to which they belong.
To point to profounder insights and justiﬁcations, serves to bring out
the supreme value of the theoretical investigations which help to solve our
suggested problem. We are dealing with systematic theories which have their
roots in the essence of theory, with an a priori, theoretical, nomological science
which deals with the ideal essence of science as such, and which accordingly
has parts relating to systematic theories whose empirical, anthropological
aspect it excludes. In a profound sense, we are dealing with the theory of
theory, with the science of the sciences. Its achievement in enriching our
knowledge must, of course, be kept separate from its problems themselves,
and from the proper content of their solution.

78 Prolegomena to pure logic

§67 The tasks of pure logic. First: the fixing of the
pure categories of meaning, the pure categories of
objects and their law-governed combinations
Having provisionally ﬁxed the Idea of the a priori discipline whose deeper
understanding will be the goal of our efforts, we may now summarize the
tasks that we shall assign to it. Three sets of tasks must be distinguished.
We must, ﬁrst of all, lay down the more important concepts, in particular
all the primitive concepts which ‘make possible’ the interconnected web of
knowledge as seen objectively, and particularly the web of theory. We must
also clarify these concepts scientiﬁcally. We are, in other words, concerned
with the concepts which constitute the Idea of uniﬁed theory, or with the
concepts which are connected with these through ideal laws. Into such a constitution second-order concepts, i.e. concepts of concepts and of other ideal
unities, naturally enter. A given theory is a certain deductive combination
of given propositions which are themselves certain sorts of combinations of
given concepts. The Idea of the pertinent ‘form’ of the theory arises if we
substitute variables for these given elements, whereby concepts of concepts
and of other Ideas, replace straightforward concepts. Here belong the concepts: Concept, Proposition, Truth etc.
The concepts of the elementary connective forms naturally play a constitutive role here, those connective forms, in particular, which are quite generally constitutive of the deductive unity of propositions, e.g. the conjunctive,
disjunctive, hypothetical linkage of propositions to form new propositions.
Such a role is also played by the forms of connection of inferior elements of
meaning into one simple proposition, which in their turn lead to the varied
subject-forms, predicate-forms, forms of conjunctive and disjunctive connection, plural forms etc. Fixed laws govern the gradual complications
through which an unending multiplicity of ever new forms emerges out of
our primitive set. These laws of complication make possible a sweeping oversight of the concepts derivable from the primitive concepts and forms; these
naturally belong, together with this sweeping oversight itself, in the ﬁeld of
research dealt with here. (Cf. Investigation  in vol. .)
In close connection with the concepts so far mentioned, i.e. the categories
of meaning, and married to them by ideal laws, are other correlative concepts such as Object, State of Affairs, Unity, Plurality, Number, Relation,
Connection etc. These are the pure, the formal objective categories. These
too must be taken into account. In both cases we are dealing with nothing
but concepts, whose notion makes clear that they are independent of the
particularity of any material of knowledge, and under which all the concepts, propositions and states of affairs that specially appear in thought,
must be ordered. They arise therefore solely in relation to our varying
thought-functions: their concrete basis is solely to be found in possible acts

The idea of pure logic

79

of thought, as such, or in the correlates which can be grasped in these. (See
§62 above and Investigation , §44 in vol. .)
All these concepts must now be pinned down, their ‘origin’ must in each
case be investigated. Not that psychological questions as to the origin of the
conceptual presentations or presentational dispositions here in question,
have the slightest interest for our discipline. This is not what we are enquiring into: we are concerned with a phenomenological origin or – if we prefer to
rule out unsuitable talk of origins, only bred in confusion – we are concerned
with insight into the essence of the concepts involved, looking methodologically to the ﬁxation of unambiguous, sharply distinct verbal meanings.
We can achieve such an end only by intuitive representation of the essence in
adequate Ideation, or, in the case of complicated concepts, through knowledge of the essentiality of the elementary concepts present in them, and of
the concepts of their forms of combination.
All these are seemingly trivial, preparatory tasks. To a large extent they
are necessarily clothed in the form of discussions of terminology, and readily seem to the layman to be barren, pettifogging word-exercises. But as long
as concepts are not distinguished and made clear to ideational intuition, by
going back to their essence, further effort is hopeless. In no ﬁeld of knowledge is equivocation more fatal, in none have confused concepts so hindered
the progress of knowledge, or so impeded the insight into its true aims, as
in the ﬁeld of pure logic. The critical analyses of these Prolegomena have
everywhere shown this.
It is impossible to overestimate the importance of this ﬁrst group of problems; it is doubtful whether they do not in fact involve the greatest difﬁculties
in the whole discipline.

§68 Secondly: the laws and theories which have their
grounds in these categories
Our second group of problems lies in the search for the laws grounded in the
two above classes of categorial concepts, which do not merely concern possible forms of complication and transformation of the theoretical items they
involve (see Investigation ), but rather the objective validity of the formal
structures which thus arise: on the one hand, the truth or falsity of meanings
as such, purely on the basis of their categorial formal structure, on the other
hand (in relation to their objective correlates), the being and not being of
objects as such, of states of affairs as such, again on the basis of their pure,
categorial form. These laws, which concern meanings and objects as such, with
the widest universality conceivable, the universality of logical categories, are
in themselves theories. (See Investigation , §29.) We have, on the one side,
the side of meaning, theories of inference, e.g. syllogistics, which is however
only one such theory. On the other side, the side of the correlates, we have

80 Prolegomena to pure logic

the pure theory of pluralities, which has its roots in the concepts of a plurality, the pure theory of numbers, which has its roots in the concept of a
number – each an independently rounded-off theory. All the laws here belonging lead to a limited number of primitive or basic laws, which have their
immediate roots in our categorial concepts. They must, in virtue of their
homogeneity, serve to base an all-comprehensive theory, which will contain
the separate theories just mentioned, as relatively closed elements in itself.
We are here concerned with the territory of those laws, which in formal universality span all possible meanings and objects, under which every particular
theory or science is ranged, which it must obey if it is to be valid. Not that
every such theory presupposes every such law as the ground of its possibility
and validity. The ideal completeness of the categorial theories and laws in
question, rather yields the all-comprehensive fund from which each particular valid theory derives the ideal grounds of essential being appropriate to
its form. These are the laws to which it conforms, and through which, as a
theory validated by its form, it can be ultimately justiﬁed. In so far as theory
is an all-embracing unity built out of single, interwoven truths, it is plain
that the laws governing the concept of truth, as well as the laws governing
the possibility of single combinations of this or that form, will be included
in the delimited territory. In spite of, or rather on account of, the fact that
theory is the narrower notion, the task of exploring the conditions of its
possibility, comprehends more content than the corresponding task in the
case of truth in general, and in the case of the primitive forms of propositional
combinations (cf. above, §65).

§69 Thirdly: the theory of the possible forms of
theories or the pure theory of manifolds
When all these investigations have been concluded, we shall have done justice
to the Idea of a science of the conditions of the possibility of theory in
general. We see at once, however, that this science points beyond itself to a
completing science, which deals a priori with the essential sorts ( forms) of
theories and the relevant laws of relation. The Idea therefore arises, all of this
being taken together, of a more comprehensive science of theory in general.
In its fundamental part, the essential concepts and laws which pertain constitutively to the Idea of Theory will be investigated. It will then go over to
differentiating this Idea, and investigating possible theories in a priori fashion, rather than the possibility of theory in general.
The tasks mentioned have been carried out to a sufﬁcient extent, and it is
possible to construct, out of purely categorial concepts, many deﬁnite concepts of possible theories or pure ‘forms’ of theories, whose essential status
has been deduced from laws. These distinct forms are not mutually unrelated. There will be a deﬁnite, ordered procedure which will enable us to
construct the possible forms of theories, to survey their legal connections,

The idea of pure logic

81

and to pass from one to another by varying their basic determining factors
etc. There will be universal propositions, if not for the forms of theory
generally, then at least for forms of theory belonging to deﬁned classes,
which will govern the legal connection, the transformation and the mutual
interchange of these forms.
The propositions that must here be afﬁrmed will plainly be of a different
content and character from the basic propositions and theorems of theories
of the second group, from, e.g., syllogistic or arithmetical laws. It is, however, clear from the start that the deduction of such propositions (for there
can be no true basic laws in this case) must have their entire basis in the
previously mentioned theories.
This is a last, highest goal for a theoretical science of theory in general.
It is also not indifferent from the point of view of the practical side of
knowledge. To ﬁt a theory into its formal class may rather be of the greatest
methodological importance. For, with the extension of the deductive, theoretical sphere, the liveliness and freedom of theoretical research also
increases: there is increased richness and fruitfulness of method. The solution
of problems raised within a theoretical discipline, or one of its theories, can
at times derive the most effective methodical help from recourse to the
categorial type or (what is the same) to the form of the theory, and perhaps
also by going over to a more comprehensive form or class of forms and to
its laws.

HH

Investigations into
phenomenology
and the theory of
knowledge

HH

Volume II, Part 1 of the German Editions

Introduction

§1 The necessity of phenomenological investigations
as a preliminary to the epistemological criticism and
clarification of pure logic
The necessity that we should begin logic with linguistic discussions has often
been acknowledged from the standpoint of a logical technology. ‘Language’,
we read in Mill, ‘is evidently one of the principal instruments or helps of
thought; and any imperfection in the instrument, or in the mode of employing it, is confessedly liable, still more than in almost any other art, to confuse and impede the process, and destroy all ground of conﬁdence in the
result. For a mind not previously versed in the meaning and right use of
the various kinds of words, to attempt the study of methods of philosophizing,
would be as if some one should attempt to become an astronomical observer, having never learnt to adjust the focal distance of his optical instruments so as to see distinctly.’1 A deeper ground for this necessity of beginning
logic with linguistic analysis is, however, seen by Mill in the fact that it
would not otherwise be possible to investigate the meaning of propositions,
a matter which stands ‘at the threshold’ of logical science itself.
This last remark of our distinguished thinker indicates a point of view
regulative for pure logic, and, be it noted, for pure logic treated as a philosophical discipline. I assume accordingly that no one will think it enough to
develop pure logic merely in the manner of our mathematical disciplines, as
a growing system of propositions having a naïvely factual validity, without
also striving to be philosophically clear in regard to these same propositions, without, that is, gaining insight into the essence of the modes of
cognition which come into play in their utterance and in the ideal possibility
of applying such propositions, together with all such conferments of sense
and objective validities as are essentially constituted therein. Linguistic discussions are certainly among the philosophically indispensable preparations
for the building of pure logic: only by their aid can the true objects of logical
research – and, following thereon, the essential species and differentiae of
such objects – be reﬁned to a clarity that excludes all misunderstanding. We

86 Investigations into phenomenology and the theory of knowledge

are not here concerned with grammatical discussions, empirically conceived
and related to some historically given language: we are concerned with discussions of a most general sort which cover the wider sphere of an objective
theory of knowledge and, closely linked with this last, the pure phenomenology of the experiences of thinking and knowing. This phenomenology, like
the more inclusive pure phenomenology of experiences in general, has, as its
exclusive concern, experiences intuitively seizable and analysable in the pure
generality of their essence, not experiences empirically perceived and treated
as real facts, as experiences of human or animal experients in the phenomenal world that we posit as an empirical fact. This phenomenology must
bring to pure expression, must describe in terms of their essential concepts
and their governing formulae of essence, the essences which directly make
themselves known in intuition, and the connections which have their roots
purely in such essences. Each such statement of essence is an a priori statement in the highest sense of the word. This sphere we must explore in
preparation for the epistemological criticism and clariﬁcation of pure logic:
our investigations will therefore all move within it.
Pure phenomenology represents a ﬁeld of neutral researches, in which
several sciences have their roots. It is, on the one hand, an ancillary to
psychology conceived as an empirical science. Proceeding in purely intuitive
fashion, it analyses and describes in their essential generality – in the speciﬁc
guise of a phenomenology of thought and knowledge – the experiences of
presentation, judgement and knowledge, experiences which, treated as classes
of real events in the natural context of zoological reality, receive a scientiﬁc
probing at the hands of empirical psychology. Phenomenology, on the other
hand, lays bare the ‘sources’ from which the basic concepts and ideal laws of
pure logic ‘ﬂow’, and back to which they must once more be traced, so as to
give them all the ‘clearness and distinctness’ needed for an understanding,
and for an epistemological critique, of pure logic. The epistemological or
phenomenological groundwork of pure logic involves very hard, but also
surpassingly important researches. To revert to what we set forth as the
tasks of pure logic in the ﬁrst volume of these Investigations, we have taken
it upon us to give ﬁrm clarity to notions and laws on which the objective
meaning and theoretical unity of all knowledge is dependent.2

§2 Elucidation of the aims of such investigations
All theoretical research, though by no means solely conducted in acts of
verbal expression or complete statement, none the less terminates in such
statement. Only in this form can truth, and in particular the truth of theory,
become an abiding possession of science, a documented, ever available treasure for knowledge and advancing research. Whatever the connection of
thought with speech may be, whether or not the appearance of our ﬁnal
judgements in the form of verbal pronouncements has a necessary grounding

Introduction 87

in essence, it is at least plain that judgements stemming from higher intellectual regions, and in particular from the regions of science, could barely arise
without verbal expression.
The objects which pure logic seeks to examine are, in the ﬁrst instance,
therefore given to it in grammatical clothing. Or, more precisely, they come
before us embedded in concrete mental states which further function either
as the meaning-intention or meaning-fulﬁlment of certain verbal expressions
– in the latter case intuitively illustrating, or intuitively providing evidence for,
our meaning – and forming a phenomenological unity with such expressions.
In these complex phenomenological unities the logician must pick out
the components that interest him, the characters of the acts, ﬁrst of all, in
which logical presentation, judgement and knowledge are consummated: he
must pursue the descriptive analysis of such act-types to the extent that this
helps the progress of his properly logical tasks. We cannot straightway
leap, from the fact that theory ‘realizes’ itself in certain mental states, and has
instances in them, to the seemingly obvious truth that such mental states
must count as the primary object of our logical researches. The pure logician
is not primarily or properly interested in the psychological judgement, the
concrete mental phenomenon, but in the logical judgement, the identical
asserted meaning, which is one over against manifold, descriptively quite
different, judgement-experiences.3 There is naturally, in the singular experiences which correspond to this ideal unity, a certain pervasive common
feature, but since the concern of the pure logician is not with the concrete
instance, but with its corresponding Idea, its abstractly apprehended universal,
he has, it would seem, no reason to leave the ﬁeld of abstraction, nor to
make concrete experiences the theme of his probing interest, instead of Ideas.
Even if phenomenological analysis of concrete thought-experiences does
not fall within the true home-ground of pure logic, it none the less is indispensable to the advance of purely logical research. For all that is logical
must be given in fully concrete fashion, if, as an object of research, it is to be
made our own, and if we are to be able to bring to self-evidence the a priori
laws which have their roots in it. What is logical is ﬁrst given us in imperfect
shape: the concept as a more or less wavering meaning, the law, built out of
concepts, as a more or less wavering assertion. We do not therefore lack
logical insights, but grasp the pure law with self-evidence, and see how it
has its base in the pure forms of thought. Such self-evidence depends, however, on the verbal meanings which come alive in the actual passing of the
judgement regarding the law. Unnoticed equivocation may permit the subsequent substitution of other concepts beneath our words, and an appeal on
behalf of an altered propositional meaning may quite readily, but wrongly,
be made on the self-evidence previously experienced. It is also possible,
conversely, that a misinterpretation based on equivocation may distort the
sense of the propositions of pure logic ( perhaps turning them into empirical, psychological propositions), and may tempt us to abandon previously

88 Investigations into phenomenology and the theory of knowledge

experienced self-evidence and the unique signiﬁcance of all that belongs to
pure logic.
It is not therefore enough that the Ideas of logic, and the pure laws set up
with them, should be given in such a manner. Our great task is now to bring
the Ideas of logic, the logical concepts and laws, to epistemological clarity and
deﬁniteness.
Here phenomenological analysis must begin. Logical concepts, as valid
thought-unities, must have their origin in intuition: they must arise out of
an ideational intuition founded on certain experiences, and must admit
of indeﬁnite reconﬁrmation, and of recognition of their self-identity, on the
reperformance of such abstraction. Otherwise put: we can absolutely not
rest content with ‘mere words’, i.e. with a merely symbolic understanding of
words’, such as we ﬁrst have when we reﬂect on the sense of the laws for
‘concepts’, ‘judgements’, ‘truths’ etc. (together with their manifold speciﬁcations) which are set up in pure logic. Meanings inspired only by remote,
confused, inauthentic intuitions – if by any intuitions at all – are not enough:
we must go back to the ‘things themselves’. We desire to render self-evident
in fully-ﬂedged intuitions that what is here given in actually performed
abstractions is what the word-meanings in our expression of the law really
and truly stand for. In the practice of cognition we strive to arouse dispositions in ourselves which will keep our meanings unshakably the same, which
will measure them sufﬁciently often against the mark set by reproducible
intuitions or by an intuitive carrying out of our abstraction. Intuitive illustration of the shifting meanings which attach to the same term in differing
propositional contexts likewise convinces us of the fact of equivocation: it
becomes evident to us that what a word means in this or that case has its
fulﬁlment in essentially different intuitive ‘moments’ or patterns, or in essentially different general notions. By distinguishing among concepts confounded
by us, and by suitably modifying our terminology, we then likewise achieve
a desired ‘clearness and distinctness’ for our logical propositions.
The phenomenology of the logical experiences aims at giving us a sufﬁciently wide descriptive (though not empirically-psychological) understanding of these mental states and their indwelling sense, as will enable us to
give ﬁxed meanings to all the fundamental concepts of logic. Such meanings
will be clariﬁed both by going back to the analytically explored connections
between meaning-intentions and meaning-fulﬁlments, and also by making
their possible function in cognition intelligible and certain. They will be such
meanings, in short, as the interest of pure logic itself requires, as well as the
interest, above all, of epistemological insight into the essence of this discipline. Fundamental logical and noetic concepts have, up to this time, been
quite imperfectly clariﬁed: countless equivocations beset them, some so pernicious, so hard to track down, and to keep consistently separate, that they
yield the main ground for the very backward state of pure logic and theory
of knowledge.

Introduction 89

We must of course admit that many conceptual differentiations and circumscriptions of the sphere of pure logic can become evident to the natural
attitude without phenomenological analysis. The relevant logical acts are
carried out and adequately ﬁtted to their fulﬁlling intuitions, though there is
no reﬂection on the phenomenological situation itself. What is most completely evident can, however, be confused with something else, what it apprehends can be misconstrued, its assured directives can be rejected. Clarifying
researches are especially needed to explain our by no means chance inclination to slip unwittingly from an objective to a psychological attitude, and to
mix up two bodies of data distinguishable in principle however much they
may be essentially related, and to be deceived by psychological misconstructions and misinterpretations of the objects of logic. Such clariﬁcations can,
by their nature, only be achieved within a phenomenological theory of the
essences of our thought- and knowledge-experiences, with continuous regard
to the things essentially meant by, and so belonging to the latter (in the precise manners in which those things are as such ‘shown forth’, ‘represented’
etc.). Psychologism can only be radically overcome by a pure phenomenology, a science inﬁnitely removed from psychology as the empirical science
of the mental attributes and states of animal realities. In our sphere, too, the
sphere of pure logic, such a phenomenology alone offers us all the necessary
conditions for a ﬁnally satisfactory establishment of the totality of basic
distinctions and insights. It alone frees us from the strong temptation, at ﬁrst
inevitable, since rooted in grounds of essence, to turn the logically objective
into the psychological.
The above mentioned motives for phenomenological analysis have an
obvious and essential connection with those which spring from basic questions
of epistemology. For if these questions are taken in the widest generality, i.e.
in the ‘formal’ generality which abstracts from all matter of knowledge – they
form part of a range of questions involved in the full clariﬁcation of the
Idea of pure logic. We have, on the one hand, the fact that all thought and
knowledge have as their aim objects or states of affairs, which they putatively ‘hit’ in the sense that the ‘being-in-itself ’ of these objects and states
is supposedly shown forth, and made an identiﬁable item, in a multitude of
actual or possible meanings, or acts of thought. We have, further, the fact
that all thought is ensouled by a thought-form which is subject to ideal laws,
laws circumscribing the objectivity or ideality of knowledge in general. These
facts, I maintain, eternally provoke questions like: How are we to understand the fact that the intrinsic being of objectivity becomes ‘presented’,
‘apprehended’ in knowledge, and so ends up by becoming subjective? What
does it mean to say that the object has ‘being-in-itself ’, and is ‘given’ in
knowledge? How can the ideality of the universal qua concept or law enter
the ﬂux of real mental states and become an epistemic possession of the
thinking person? What does the adaequatio rei et intellectus mean in various cases of knowledge, according as what we apprehend and know, is

90 Investigations into phenomenology and the theory of knowledge

individual or universal, a fact or a law etc.? These and similar questions can,
it is plain, not be separated from the above-mentioned questions regarding
the clariﬁcation of pure logic, since the task of clarifying such logical Ideas
as Concept and Object, Truth and Proposition, Fact and Law etc., inevitably leads on to these same questions. We should in any case have to tackle
them so that the essence of the clariﬁcation aimed at in phenomenological
analyses should not itself be left obscure.

§3 The difficulties of pure phenomenological analysis
The difﬁculties of clearing up the basic concepts of logic are a natural
consequence of the extraordinary difﬁculties of strict phenomenological
analysis. These are in the main the same whether our immanent analysis aims
at the pure essence of experiences (all empirical facticity and individuation being excluded) or treats experiences from an empirical, psychological
standpoint. Psychologists usually discuss such difﬁculties when they consider introspection as a source of our detailed psychological knowledge,
not properly however, but in order to draw a false antithesis between introspection and ‘outer’ perception. The source of all such difﬁculties lies in the
unnatural direction of intuition and thought which phenomenological analysis
requires. Instead of becoming lost in the performance of acts built intricately on one another, and instead of (as it were) naïvely positing the existence of the objects intended in their sense and then going on to characterize
them, or of assuming such objects hypothetically, of drawing conclusions
from all this etc., we must rather practise ‘reﬂection’, i.e. make these acts
themselves, and their immanent meaning-content, our objects. When objects
are intuited, thought of, theoretically pondered on, and thereby given to
us as actualities in certain ontic modalities, we must direct our theoretical
interest away from such objects, not posit them as realities as they appear
or hold in the intentions of our acts. These acts, contrariwise, though
hitherto not objective, must now be made objects of apprehension and of
theoretical assertion. We must deal with them in new acts of intuition and
thinking, we must analyse and describe them in their essence, we must
make them objects of empirical or ideational thought. Here we have a
direction of thought running counter to deeply ingrained habits which
have been steadily strengthened since the dawn of mental development.
Hence the well-nigh ineradicable tendency to slip out of a phenomenological
thought-stance into one that is straightforwardly objective, or to substitute
for mental acts, or for the ‘appearances’ or ‘meanings’ immanent in them,
characters which, in a naïve performance of such acts, were attributed to
their objects. Hence, too, the tendency to treat whole classes of genuinely
subsistent objects, e.g. Ideas – since these may be evidently given to us in
ideating intuitions – as phenomenological constituents of presentations
of them.

Introduction 91

A much discussed difﬁculty – one which seems to threaten in principle
all possible immanent description of mental acts or indeed all phenomenological treatment of essences – lies in the fact that when we pass over from
naïvely performed acts to an attitude of reﬂection, or when we perform
acts proper to such reﬂection, our former acts necessarily undergo change.
How can we rightly assess the nature and extent of such change? How
indeed can we know anything whatever about it, whether as a fact or as a
necessity of essence?
In addition to this difﬁculty of reaching ﬁrm results, capable of being
self-evidently reidentiﬁed on many occasions, we have the further difﬁculty
of stating such results, of communicating them to others. Completely selfevident truths of essence, established by the most exact analysis, must be
expounded by way of expressions whose rich variety does not compensate
for the fact that they only ﬁt familiar natural objects, while the experiences
in which such objects become constituted for consciousness, can be directly
referred to only by way of a few highly ambiguous words such as ‘sensation’,
‘perception’, ‘presentation’ etc. One has, further, to employ expressions which
stand for what is intentional in such acts, for the object to which they are
directed, since it is, in fact, impossible to describe referential acts without
using expressions which recur to the things to which such acts refer. One
then readily forgets that such subsidiarily described objectivity, which is
necessarily introduced into almost all phenomenological description, has
undergone a change of sense, in virtue of which it now belongs to the sphere
of phenomenology.
If we ignore such difﬁculties, others emerge concerned with the persuasive
communication of our resultant insights to others. These insights can be
tested and conﬁrmed only by persons well-trained in the ability to engage in
pure description in the unnatural attitude of reﬂection, trained in short to
allow phenomenological relations to work upon them in full purity. Such
purity means that we must keep out the falsifying intrusion of all assertions
based on the naïve acceptance and assessment of objects, whose existence
has been posited in the acts now receiving phenomenological treatment. It
likewise prohibits any other going beyond whatever is essential and proper
to such acts, any application to them of naturalistic interpretations and
assertions. It forbids us, i.e., to set them up as psychological realities (even
in an indeﬁnitely general or exemplary fashion), as the states of ‘mindendowed beings’ of any sort whatsoever. The capacity for such researches is
not readily come by, nor can it be achieved or replaced by, e.g., the most
elaborate of trainings in experimental psychology.
Serious as are the difﬁculties standing in the way of a pure phenomenology in general, and of the phenomenology of the logical experiences in
particular, they are by no means such as to make the whole attempt to
overcome them appear hopeless. Resolute cooperation among a generation
of research-workers, conscious of their goal and dedicated to the main issue,

92 Investigations into phenomenology and the theory of knowledge

would, I think, sufﬁce to decide the most important questions in the ﬁeld,
those concerned with its basic constitution. Here we have a ﬁeld of attainable discoveries, fundamentally involved in the possibility of a scientiﬁc
philosophy. Such discoveries have indeed nothing dazzling about them: they
lack any obviously useful relation to practice or to the fulﬁlment of higher
emotional needs. They also lack any imposing apparatus of experimental
methodology, through which experimental psychology has gained so much
credit and has built up such a rich force of cooperative workers.

§4 It is essential to keep in mind the grammatical
side of our logical experiences
Analytic phenomenology, needed by the logician in his preparatory laying
of foundations, is concerned, among other things, with ‘presentations’ and
with them primarily; it is, more precisely, concerned with those presentations to which expression has been given. In the complex objects of its study,
its primary interest attaches to the experiences lying behind ‘mere expressions’, experiences which perform roles either of meaning-intention or of
meaning-fulﬁlment. It cannot, however, quite ignore the sensuous-linguistic
side of its complex objects (the element of ‘mere expression’ in them) nor the
way in which this element is associated with the meaning that ‘ensouls’ it.
Everyone knows how readily and how unnoticeably an analysis of meaning can be led astray by grammatical analysis. Since the direct analysis of
meaning is, however, difﬁcult, we may welcome each aid, however imperfect, that indirectly anticipates its results, but grammatical analysis is even
more important in virtue of the errors its use promotes when it replaces a
true analysis of meaning, than for any positive aid. Rough reﬂection on our
thoughts and their verbal expression, conducted by us without special schooling, and often needed for the practical ends of thinking, sufﬁce to indicate a
certain parallelism between thinking and speaking. We all know that words
mean something, and that, generally speaking, different words express different meanings. If we could regard such a correspondence as perfect, and
as given a priori, and as one particularly in which the essential categories of
meaning had perfect mirror-images in the categories of grammar, a phenomenology of linguistic forms would include a phenomenology of the meaningexperiences (experiences of thinking, judging etc.) and meaning-analysis
would, so to speak, coincide with grammatical analysis.
Deep reﬂection is not, however, needed to show that a parallelism satisfying such far-reaching demands has as little foundation in grounds of
essence as it obtains in fact. Grammatically relevant distinctions of meaning
are at times essential, at times contingent, according as the practical aims of
speech dictate peculiar forms for essential or contingent differences of meaning. (The latter are merely such as have a frequent occurrence in human
intercourse.)

Introduction 93

It is well-known, however, that differentiation of expressions does not
merely depend on differences of meaning. I need point only to ‘shades’ of
meaning, or to aesthetic tendencies which ﬁght against any bare uniformity
of expression, or against discord in speech-sound or rhythm, and so demand
an abundant store of available synonyms.
The rough concomitances among verbal and thought-differences, and
particularly among forms of words and thoughts, makes us naturally tend
to seek logical distinctions behind expressed grammatical distinctions. It
is, therefore, an important matter for logic that the relation between expression and meaning should be made analytically clear. We should perceive clearly
that, in order to decide whether a distinction should, in a given case, count
as logical or merely grammatical, we must go back from vague acts of meaning to the correspondingly clear, articulate ones, acts saturated with the
fulness of exemplary intuition in which their meaning is fulﬁlled.
It is not enough to have the common knowledge, easily garnered from
suitable examples, that grammatical differences need not coincide with logical ones. The common knowledge that such distinctions do not always go
hand in hand – that languages, in other words, express material differences
of meaning, widely used in communication, in forms as pervasive as the
fundamental logical differences having their a priori roots in the general
essence of meanings – such common knowledge may open the way to a
dangerous radicalism. The ﬁeld of logical forms may be unduly restricted. A
wide range of logically signiﬁcant forms may be cast forth as merely grammatical: only a few may be kept, such as sufﬁce to leave some content to
traditional syllogizing. Brentano’s attempted reform of formal logic, valuable
as it no doubt still is, plainly suffered from this exaggeration. Only a complete clearing-up of the essential phenomenological relations between expression and meaning, or between meaning-intention and meaning-fulﬁlment,
can give us a ﬁrm middle stance, and can enable us to give the requisite
clearness to the relations between grammatical and meaning-analysis.

§5 Statement of the main aims of the following
analytical investigations
We accordingly pass to a series of analytic investigations which will clear
up the constitutive Ideas of a pure or formal logic, investigations which
relate in the ﬁrst place to the pure theory of logical forms. Starting with the
empirical connection between meaning-experiences and expressions, we
must try to ﬁnd out what our variously ambiguous talk about ‘expressing’
or ‘meaning’ really amounts to. We must try to see what essential phenomenological or logical distinctions apply a priori to expressions, and how we may
in essence describe, and may place in pure categories, the experiences – to
deal ﬁrst with the phenomenological side of expressions – that have an a
priori ﬁtness for the meaning-function. We must ﬁnd out how the ‘presenting’

94 Investigations into phenomenology and the theory of knowledge

and ‘judging’ achieved in such experiences stand to their corresponding
‘intuition’, how they are ‘illustrated’, or perhaps ‘conﬁrmed’ or ‘fulﬁlled’, in
the latter, or rendered ‘evident’ by it etc. It is not hard to see that investigations of such matters must precede all clariﬁcations of the basic concepts
and categories of logic. Among our introductory investigations we shall
have to raise fundamental questions as to the acts, or, alternatively, the
ideal meanings, which in logic pass under the name of ‘presentations’
(Vorstellungen). It is important to clarify and prise apart the many concepts
that the word ‘presentation’ has covered, concepts in which the psychological,
the epistemological and the logical are utterly confused. Similar analyses deal
with the concept of judgement in the sense in which logic is concerned with
it. So-called ‘judgement-theory’ neglects this task: it is in the main, in respect
of its essential problems, a theory of presentation. We are naturally not
interested in a psychological theory, but in a phenomenology of presentationand judgement-experiences as delimited by our epistemological interests.
As we probe the essence of the expressive experiences, we must also dig
more deeply into their intentional subject-matter, their objective intention’s
ideal sense, i.e. into the unity of its meaning and the unity of its object. We
must, above all, dwell upon the enigmatic double sense or manner, the twosided context, in which the same experience has a ‘content’, and the manner
in which in addition to its real (reell ) and proper content, an ideal, intentional content must and can dwell in it.
Here also belong questions relating to the ‘object-directedness’ or ‘objectlessness’ of logical acts, to the sense of the distinction between intentional
and true objects, to the clariﬁcation of the Idea of truth in relation to the
Idea of judgemental self-evidence, to the clariﬁcation of the remaining, closely
connected logical and noetic categories. These investigations in part cover
the same ground as those dealing with the constitution of logical forms, to
the extent, of course, that we settle questions as to the acceptance or rejection
of putative logical forms, or doubts as to their logical or merely grammatical
distinctness from forms already recognized, in the course of our clariﬁcation
of form-giving, categorial concepts.
We have thus vaguely indicated the range of problems to which the ensuing investigations will be oriented. These investigations make no claim to be
exhaustive. Their aim is not to provide a logical system, but to do the initial
spadework for a philosophical logic which will derive clearness from basic
phenomenological sources. The paths taken by such an analytic investigation will also naturally differ from those suitable to a ﬁnal, systematic,
logically ordered statement of established truth.

§6 Additional Notes
Note 1 Our investigations will often inevitably take us beyond the narrow
phenomenological sphere whose study is really required for giving direct

Introduction 95

evidence to the Ideas of logic. This sphere is itself not given to us initially,
but becomes delimited in the course of our investigation. We are, in particular, forced beyond this sphere of research when we prise apart the many
confused concepts obscurely confounded in our understanding of logical
terms, and when we ﬁnd which of them are truly logical.
Note 2 The phenomenological founding of logic involves the difﬁculty that
we must, in our exposition, make use of all the concepts we are trying to
clarify. This coincides with a certain wholly irremovable defect which affects
the systematic course of our basic phenomenological and epistemological
investigations. If a type of thought requires prior clariﬁcation, we should
not make uncritical use of its terms or concepts in that clariﬁcation itself.
But one should not expect that one should only be required to analyse such
concepts critically, when the actual interconnection of one’s logical materials has led up to them. Or, put differently, systematic clariﬁcation, whether
in pure logic or any other discipline, would in itself seem to require a stepwise
following out of the ordering of things, of the systematic interconnection in
the science to be clariﬁed. Our investigation can, however, only proceed
securely, if it repeatedly breaks with such systematic sequence, if it removes
conceptual obscurities which threaten the course of investigation before the
natural sequence of subject-matters can lead up to such concepts. We search,
as it were, in zig-zag fashion, a metaphor all the more apt since the close
interdependence of our various epistemological concepts leads us back again
and again to our original analyses, where the new conﬁrms the old, and the
old the new.
Note 3 If our sense of phenomenology has been grasped, and if it has not
been given the current interpretation of an ordinary ‘descriptive psychology’, a part of natural science, then an objection, otherwise justiﬁable, will
fall to the ground, an objection to the effect that all theory of knowledge,
conceived as a systematic phenomenological clariﬁcation of knowledge,
is built upon psychology. On this interpretation pure logic, treated by us
as an epistemologically clariﬁed, philosophical discipline, must in the end
likewise rest upon psychology, if only upon its preliminary descriptive researches into intentional experiences. Why then so much heated resistance
to psychologism?
We naturally reply that if psychology is given its old meaning, phenomenology is not descriptive psychology: its peculiar ‘pure’ description, its
contemplation of pure essences on a basis of exemplary individual intuitions
of experiences (often freely imagined ones), and its descriptive ﬁxation of
the contemplated essences into pure concepts, is no empirical, scientiﬁc description. It rather excludes the natural performance of all empirical (naturalistic) apperceptions and positings. Statements of descriptive psychology
regarding ‘perceptions’, ‘judgements’, ‘feelings’, ‘volitions’ etc., use such names

96 Investigations into phenomenology and the theory of knowledge

to refer to the real states of animal organisms in a real natural order, just as
descriptive statements concerning physical states deal with happenings in a
nature not imagined but real. All general statements have here a character
of empirical generality: they hold for this nature. Phenomenology, however,
does not discuss states of animal organisms (not even as belonging to a
possible nature as such), but perceptions, judgements, feelings as such, and
what pertains to them a priori with unlimited generality, as pure instances of
pure species, of what may be seen through a purely intuitive apprehension
of essence, whether generic or speciﬁc. Pure arithmetic likewise speaks of
numbers, and pure geometry of spatial shapes, employing pure intuitions in
their ideational universality. Not psychology, therefore, but phenomenology,
underlies all clariﬁcations in pure logic (and in all forms of rational criticism). Phenomenology has, however, a very different function as the necessary
basis for every psychology that could with justiﬁcation and in strictness be
called scientiﬁc, just as pure mathematics, e.g. pure geometry and dynamics,
is the necessary foundation for all exact natural science (any theory of empirical things in nature with their empirical forms, movements etc.). Our
essential insights into perceptions, volitions and other forms of experience
will naturally hold also of the corresponding empirical states of animal
organisms, as geometrical insights hold of spatial ﬁgures in nature.
Translator’s Additional Note 4 The above Note 3 is a typical account of
what Husserl had come to mean by ‘phenomenology’ by the time that the
Second Edition of the Logical Investigations was published in 1913. It replaces the following Note, which indicates what he meant by the term when
the First Edition was published in 1901:
Phenomenology is descriptive psychology. Epistemological criticism is
therefore in essence psychology, or at least only capable of being built
on a psychological basis. Pure logic therefore also rests on psychology –
what then is the point of the whole battle against psychologism?
The necessity of this sort of psychological foundation of pure logic,
i.e. a strictly descriptive one, cannot lead us into error regarding the
mutual independence of the two sciences, logic and psychology. For
pure description is merely a preparatory step towards theory, not theory
itself. One and the same sphere of pure description can accordingly
serve to prepare for very different theoretical sciences. It is not the full
science of psychology that serves as a foundation for pure logic, but certain classes of descriptions which are the step preparatory to the theoretical researches of psychology. These in so far as they describe the
empirical objects whose genetic connections the science wishes to pursue, also form the substrate for those fundamental abstractions in which
logic seizes the essence of its ideal objects and connections with inward
evidence. Since it is epistemologically of unique importance that we

Introduction 97

should separate the purely descriptive examination of the knowledgeexperience, disembarrassed of all theoretical psychological interests, from
the truly psychological researches directed to empirical explanation and
origins, it will be good if we rather speak of ‘phenomenology’ than of
descriptive psychology. It also recommends itself for the further reason
that the expression ‘descriptive psychology’, as it occurs in the talk of
many scientists, means the sphere of scientiﬁc psychological investigation, which is marked off by a methodological preference for inner
experience and by an abstraction from all psychophysical explanation.

§7 ‘Freedom from presuppositions’ as a principle in
epistemological investigations
An epistemological investigation that can seriously claim to be scientiﬁc
must, it has often been emphasized, satisfy the principle of freedom from
presuppositions. This principle, we think, only seeks to express the strict
exclusion of all statements not permitting of a comprehensive phenomenological realization. Every epistemological investigation that we carry out
must have its pure foundation in phenomenology. The ‘theory’ that it aspires
to, is no more than a thinking over, a coming to an evident understanding
of, thinking and knowing as such, in their pure generic essence, of the speciﬁcations and forms that they essentially have, of the immanent structures
that their objective relations involve, of the meaning of ‘validity’, ‘justiﬁcation’, ‘mediate’ and ‘immediate evidence’, and their opposites, as applied to
such structures, of the parallel speciﬁcations of such Ideas in relation to
varying regions of possible objects of knowledge, of the clariﬁed sense and
role of the formal and material ‘laws of thought’ seen in their a priori
structural connections with the knowing consciousness etc. If such a ‘thinking over’ of the meaning of knowledge is itself to yield, not mere opinion,
but the evident knowledge it strictly demands, it must be a pure intuition of
essences, exemplarily performed on an actual given basis of experiences of
thinking and knowing. That acts of thought at times refer to transcendent,
even to non-existent and impossible objects, is not to the case. For such
direction to objects, such presentation and meaning of what is not really
(reell ) part of the phenomenological make-up of our experiences, is a descriptive feature of the experiences in question, whose sense it should be
possible to ﬁx and clarify by considering the experiences themselves. In no
other way would it be possible.
We must keep apart from the pure theory of knowledge questions concerning the justiﬁability of accepting ‘mental’ and ‘physical’ realities which
transcend consciousness, questions whether the statements of scientists regarding them are to be given a serious or unserious sense, questions whether
it is justiﬁable or sensible to oppose a second, even more emphatically ‘transcendent’ world, to the phenomenal nature with which science is correlated,

98 Investigations into phenomenology and the theory of knowledge

and other similar questions. The question as to the existence and nature of
‘the external world’ is a metaphysical question. The theory of knowledge, in
generally clearing up the ideal essence and valid sense of cognitive thought,
will of course deal with general questions regarding the possibility and manner of a knowledge or rational surmise about ‘real’ objective things, things
in principle transcending the experiences which know them, and regarding
the norms which the true sense of such a knowledge requires: it will not
enter upon the empirically oriented question as to whether we as men really
can arrive at such knowledge from the data we actually have, nor will it
attempt to realize such knowledge. On our view, theory of knowledge, properly described, is no theory. It is not science in the pointed sense of an
explanatorily uniﬁed theoretical whole. Theoretical explanation means an
ever increased rendering intelligible of singular facts through general laws,
and an ever increased rendering intelligible of general laws through some
fundamental law. In the realm of facts, our task is to know that what happens under given groups of circumstances, happens necessarily, i.e. according to natural laws. In the realm of the a priori our task is to understand the
necessity of speciﬁc, lower-level relationships in terms of comprehensive
general necessities, and ultimately in terms of those most primitive, universal
relational laws that we call axioms. The theory of knowledge has nothing
to explain in this theoretical sense, it neither constructs deductive theories
nor falls under any. This is clear enough if we consider the most general, the
so-to-say formal theory of knowledge that came before us in our Prolegomena
as the philosophical completion of pure mathematics conceived in absolute
width as including all a priori, categorial knowledge in the form of systematic theories. This theory of theories goes together with, and is illuminated
by, a formal theory of knowledge which precedes all empirical theory,
which precedes, therefore, all empirical knowledge of the real, all physical
science on the one hand, and all psychology on the other, and of course all
metaphysics. Its aim is not to explain knowledge in the psychological or
psychophysical sense as a factual occurrence in objective nature, but to shed
light on the Idea of knowledge in its constitutive elements and laws. It does
not try to follow up the real connections of coexistence and succession with
which actual acts of knowledge are interwoven, but to understand the ideal
sense of the speciﬁc connections in which the objectivity of knowledge may
be documented. It endeavours to raise to clearness the pure forms and laws
of knowledge by tracing knowledge back to an adequate fulﬁlment in intuition. This ‘clearing up’ takes place in the framework of a phenomenology of
knowledge, a phenomenology oriented, as we saw, to the essential structures
of pure experiences and to the structures of sense (Sinnbestände) that belong
to these. From the beginning, as at all later stages, its scientiﬁc statements
involve not the slightest reference to real existence: no metaphysical, scientiﬁc and, above all, no psychological assertions can therefore occur among
its premisses.

Introduction 99

A purely phenomenological ‘theory’ of knowledge naturally has an application to all naturally developed, and (in a good sense) ‘naïve’ sciences, which
it transforms into ‘philosophical’ sciences. It transforms them, in other words,
into sciences which provide us with clariﬁed, assured knowledge in every
sense in which it is possible to desire the latter. As regards the sciences of
‘reality’, such epistemological clariﬁcation can as much be regarded as a
‘scientiﬁc’ as a ‘metaphysical’ evaluation.
The investigations which follow aspire solely to such freedom from metaphysical, scientiﬁc and psychological presuppositions. No harm will of course
be done by occasional side-references which remain without effect on the
content and character of one’s analyses, nor by the many expository devices
addressed to one’s public, whose existence ( like one’s own) is not therefore
presupposed by the content of one’s investigations. Nor does one exceed
one’s prescribed limits if one starts, e.g., from existent languages and discusses the merely communicative meaning of their many forms of expression, and so on. It is easily seen that the sense and the epistemological worth
of the following analyses does not depend on the fact that there really are
languages, and that men really make use of them in their mutual dealings,
or that there really are such things as men and a nature, and that they do
not merely exist in imagined, possible fashion.
The real premisses of our putative results must lie in propositions satisfying the requirement that what they assert permits of an adequate phenomenological justiﬁcation, a fulﬁlment through evidence in the strictest sense.
Such propositions must not, further, ever be adduced in some other sense
than that in which they have been intuitively established.

HH

Investigation I

Expression and meaning

HH

Chapter 1

Essential distinctions

§1 An ambiguity in the term ‘sign’
The terms ‘expression’ and ‘sign’ are often treated as synonyms, but it will
not be amiss to point out that they do not always coincide in application
in common usage. Every sign is a sign for something, but not every sign
has ‘meaning’, a ‘sense’ that the sign ‘expresses’. In many cases it is not
even true that a sign ‘stands for’ that of which we may say it is a sign. And
even where this can be said, one has to observe that ‘standing for’ will
not count as the ‘meaning’ which characterizes the expression. For signs
in the sense of indications (notes, marks etc.) do not express anything,
unless they happen to fulﬁl a signiﬁcant as well as an indicative function.
If, as one unwillingly does, one limits oneself to expressions employed in
living discourse, the notion of an indication seems to apply more widely
than that of an expression, but this does not mean that its content is the
genus of which an expression is the species. To mean is not a particular
way of being a sign in the sense of indicating something. It has a narrower
application only because meaning – in communicative speech – is always
bound up with such an indicative relation, and this in its turn leads to a
wider concept, since meaning is also capable of occurring without such a
connection. Expressions function meaningfully even in isolated mental life,
where they no longer serve to indicate anything. The two notions of sign do
not therefore really stand in the relation of more extensive genus to narrower species.
The whole matter requires more thorough discussion.

§2 The essence of indication
Of the two concepts connected with the word ‘sign’, we shall ﬁrst deal with
that of an indication. The relation that here obtains we shall call the indicative relation. In this sense a brand is the sign of a slave, a ﬂag the sign of a
nation. Here all marks belong, as characteristic qualities suited to help us in
recognizing the objects to which they attach.

104 Expression and meaning

But the concept of an indication extends more widely than that of a mark.
We say the Martian canals are signs of the existence of intelligent beings on
Mars, that fossil vertebrae are signs of the existence of prediluvian animals
etc. Signs to aid memory, such as the much-used knot in a handkerchief,
memorials etc., also have their place here. If suitable things, events or their
properties are deliberately produced to serve as such indications, one calls
them ‘signs’ whether they exercise this function or not. Only in the case
of indications deliberately and artiﬁcially brought about, does one speak of
standing for, and that both in respect of the action which produces the
marking (the branding or chalking etc.), and in the sense of the indication
itself, i.e. taken in its relation to the object it stands for or that it is to signify.
These distinctions and others like them do not deprive the concept of
indication of its essential unity. A thing is only properly an indication if and
where it in fact serves to indicate something to some thinking being. If we
wish to seize the pervasively common element here present we must refer
back to such cases of ‘live’ functioning. In these we discover as a common
circumstance the fact that certain objects or states of affairs of whose reality
someone has actual knowledge indicate to him the reality of certain other
objects or states of affairs, in the sense that his belief in the reality of the one
is experienced (though not at all evidently) as motivating a belief or surmise
in the reality of the other. This relation of ‘motivation’ represents a descriptive unity among our acts of judgement in which indicating and indicated
states of affairs become constituted for the thinker. This descriptive unity is
not to be conceived as a mere form-quality founded upon our acts of judgement, for it is in their unity that the essence of indication lies. More lucidly
put: the ‘motivational’ unity of our acts of judgement has itself the character
of a unity of judgement; before it as a whole an objective correlate, a unitary
state of affairs, parades itself, is meant in such a judgement, appears to be in
and for that judgement. Plainly such a state of affairs amounts to just this:
that certain things may or must exist, since other things have been given.
This ‘since’, taken as expressing an objective connection, is the objective
correlate of ‘motivation’ taken as a descriptively peculiar way of combining
acts of judgement into a single act of judgement.

§5 Expressions as meaningful signs. Setting aside of a
sense of ‘expression’ not relevant for our purpose
From indicative signs we distinguish meaningful signs, i.e. expressions. We
thereby employ the term ‘expression’ restrictively: we exclude much that
ordinary speech would call an ‘expression’ from its range of application.
There are other cases in which we have thus to do violence to usage, where
concepts for which only ambiguous terms exist call for a ﬁxed terminology.
We shall lay down, for provisional intelligibility, that each instance or part
of speech, as also each sign that is essentially of the same sort, shall count as

Essential distinctions 105

an expression, whether or not such speech is actually uttered, or addressed
with communicative intent to any persons or not. Such a deﬁnition excludes
facial expression and the various gestures which involuntarily accompany
speech without communicative intent, or those in which a man’s mental
states achieve understandable ‘expression’ for his environment, without the
added help of speech. Such ‘utterances’ are not expressions in the sense in
which a case of speech is an expression, they are not phenomenally one with
the experiences made manifest in them in the consciousness of the man who
manifests them, as is the case with speech. In such manifestations one man
communicates nothing to another: their utterance involves no intent to put
certain ‘thoughts’ on record expressively, whether for the man himself, in
his solitary state, or for others. Such ‘expressions’, in short, have properly
speaking, no meaning. It is not to the point that another person may interpret our involuntary manifestations, e.g. our ‘expressive movements’, and that
he may thereby become deeply acquainted with our inner thoughts and
emotions. They ‘mean’ something to him in so far as he interprets them, but
even for him they are without meaning in the special sense in which verbal
signs have meaning: they only mean in the sense of indicating.
In the treatment which follows these distinctions must be raised to complete conceptual clarity.

§6 Questions as to the phenomenological and
intentional distinctions which pertain to expressions
as such
It is usual to distinguish two things in regard to every expression:
1. The expression physically regarded (the sensible sign, the articulate
sound-complex, the written sign on paper etc.).
2. A certain sequence of mental states, associatively linked with the expression, which make it be the expression of something. These mental states
are generally called the ‘sense’ or the ‘meaning’ of the expression, this being
taken to be in accord with what these words ordinarily mean. But we shall
see this notion to be mistaken, and that a mere distinction between physical
signs and sense-giving experiences is by no means enough, and not at all
enough for logical purposes.
The points here made have long been observed in the special case of
names. We distinguish, in the case of each name, between what it ‘shows
forth’ (i.e. mental states) and what it means. And again between what it
means (the sense or ‘content’ of its naming presentation) and what it names
(the object of that presentation). We shall need similar distinctions in the
case of all expression, and shall have to explore their nature precisely. Such
distinctions have led to our distinction between the notions of ‘expression’
and ‘indication’, which is not in conﬂict with the fact that an expression in
living speech also functions as an indication, a point soon to come up for

106 Expression and meaning

discussion. To these distinctions other important ones will be added which
will concern the relations between meaning and the intuition which illustrates meaning and on occasion renders it evident. Only by paying heed to
these relations, can the concept of meaning be clearly delimited, and can the
fundamental opposition between the symbolic and the epistemological function of meanings be worked out.

§7 Expressions as they function in communication
Expressions were originally framed to fulﬁl a communicative function: let
us, accordingly, ﬁrst study expressions in this function, so that we may be
able to work out their essential logical distinctions. The articulate soundcomplex, the written sign etc., ﬁrst becomes a spoken word or communicative
bit of speech, when a speaker produces it with the intention of ‘expressing
himself about something’ through its means; he must endow it with a sense
in certain acts of mind, a sense he desires to share with his auditors. Such
sharing becomes a possibility if the auditor also understands the speaker’s
intention. He does this inasmuch as he takes the speaker to be a person, who
is not merely uttering sounds but speaking to him, who is accompanying
those sounds with certain sense-giving acts, which the sounds reveal to the
hearer, or whose sense they seek to communicate to him. What ﬁrst makes
mental commerce possible, and turns connected speech into discourse, lies
in the correlation among the corresponding physical and mental experiences
of communicating persons which is effected by the physical side of speech.
Speaking and hearing, intimation of mental states through speaking and
reception thereof in hearing, are mutually correlated.
If one surveys these interconnections, one sees at once that all expressions
in communicative speech function as indications. They serve the hearer as
signs of the ‘thoughts’ of the speaker, i.e. of his sense-giving inner experiences, as well as of the other inner experiences which are part of his communicative intention. This function of verbal expressions we shall call their
intimating function. The content of such intimation consists in the inner
experiences intimated. The sense of the predicate ‘intimated’ can be understood more narrowly or more widely. The narrower sense we may restrict to
acts which impart sense, while the wider sense will cover all acts that a hearer
may introject into a speaker on the basis of what he says (possibly because
he tells us of such acts). If, e.g., we state a wish, our judgement concerning
that wish is what we intimate in the narrower sense of the word, whereas the
wish itself is intimated in the wider sense. The same holds of an ordinary
statement of perception, which the hearer forthwith takes to belong to some
actual perception. The act of perception is there intimated in the wider
sense, the judgement built upon it in the narrower sense. We at once see that
ordinary speech permits us to call an experience which is intimated an experience which is expressed.

Essential distinctions 107

To understand an intimation is not to have conceptual knowledge of it,
not to judge in the sense of asserting anything about it: it consists simply
in the fact that the hearer intuitively takes the speaker to be a person who
is expressing this or that, or as we certainly can say, perceives him as such.
When I listen to someone, I perceive him as a speaker, I hear him recounting, demonstrating, doubting, wishing etc. The hearer perceives the intimation in the same sense in which he perceives the intimating person – even
though the mental phenomena which make him a person cannot fall, for
what they are, in the intuitive grasp of another. Common speech credits us
with percepts even of other people’s inner experiences; we ‘see’ their anger,
their pain etc. Such talk is quite correct, as long as, e.g., we allow outward
bodily things likewise to count as perceived, and as long as, in general, the
notion of perception is not restricted to the adequate, the strictly intuitive
percept. If the essential mark of perception lies in the intuitive persuasion
that a thing or event is itself before us for our grasping – such a persuasion
is possible, and in the main mass of cases actual, without verbalized, conceptual apprehension – then the receipt of such an intimation is the mere
perceiving of it. The essential distinction just touched on is of course present
here. The hearer perceives the speaker as manifesting certain inner experiences, and to that extent he also perceives these experiences themselves:
he does not, however, himself experience them, he has not an ‘inner’ but an
‘outer’ percept of them. Here we have the big difference between the real
grasp of what is in adequate intuition, and the putative grasp of what is on
a basis of inadequate, though intuitive, presentation. In the former case we
have to do with an experienced, in the latter case with a presumed being, to
which no truth corresponds at all. Mutual understanding demands a certain
correlation among the mental acts mutually unfolded in intimation and in
the receipt of such intimation, but not at all their exact resemblance.

§8 Expressions in solitary life
So far we have considered expressions as used in communication, which last
depends essentially on the fact that they operate indicatively. But expressions also play a great part in uncommunicated, interior mental life. This
change in function plainly has nothing to do with whatever makes an expression an expression. Expressions continue to have meanings as they had
before, and the same meanings as in dialogue. A word only cases to be a
word when our interest stops at its sensory contour, when it becomes a mere
sound-pattern. But when we live in the understanding of a word, it expresses
something and the same thing, whether we address it to anyone or not.
It seems clear, therefore, that an expression’s meaning, and whatever else
pertains to it essentially, cannot coincide with its feats of intimation. Or
shall we say that, even in solitary mental life, one still uses expressions to
intimate something, though not to a second person? Shall one say that in

108 Expression and meaning

soliloquy one speaks to oneself, and employs words as signs, i.e. as indications, of one’s own inner experiences? I cannot think such a view acceptable.
Words function as signs here as they do everywhere else: everywhere they
can be said to point to something. But if we reﬂect on the relation of
expression to meaning, and to this end break up our complex, intimately
uniﬁed experience of the sense-ﬁlled expression, into the two factors of word
and sense, the word comes before us as intrinsically indifferent, whereas the
sense seems the thing aimed at by the verbal sign and meant by its means:
the expression seems to direct interest away from itself towards its sense,
and to point to the latter. But this pointing is not an indication in the sense
previously discussed. The existence of the sign neither ‘motivates’ the existence of the meaning, nor, properly expressed, our belief in the meaning’s
existence. What we are to use as an indication, must be perceived by us as
existent. This holds also of expressions used in communication, but not for
expressions used in soliloquy, where we are in general content with imagined rather than with actual words. In imagination a spoken or printed word
ﬂoats before us, though in reality it has no existence. We should not, however, confuse imaginative presentations, and the image-contents they rest
on, with their imagined objects. The imagined verbal sound, or the imagined
printed word, does not exist, only its imaginative presentation does so. The
difference is the difference between imagined centaurs and the imagination
of such beings. The word’s non-existence neither disturbs nor interests us,
since it leaves the word’s expressive function unaffected. Where it does make a
difference is where intimation is linked with meaning. Here thought must not
be merely expressed as meaning, but must be communicated and intimated.
We can only do the latter where we actually speak and hear.
One of course speaks, in a certain sense, even in soliloquy, and it is
certainly possible to think of oneself as speaking, and even as speaking to
oneself, as, e.g., when someone says to himself: ‘You have gone wrong, you
can’t go on like that.’ But in the genuine sense of communication, there is
no speech in such cases, nor does one tell oneself anything: one merely
conceives of oneself as speaking and communicating. In a monologue words
can perform no function of indicating the existence of mental acts, since
such indication would there be quite purposeless. For the acts in question
are themselves experienced by us at that very moment.

§9 Phenomenological distinctions between
the physical appearance of the expression, and
the sense-giving and sense-fulfilling act
If we now turn from experiences specially concerned with intimation, and
consider expressions in respect of distinctions that pertain to them equally
whether they occur in dialogue or soliloquy, two things seem to be left over:
the expressions themselves, and what they express as their meaning or sense.

Essential distinctions 109

Several relations are, however, intertwined at this point, and talk about
‘meaning’, or about ‘what is expressed’, is correspondingly ambiguous. If we
seek a foothold in pure description, the concrete phenomenon of the senseinformed expression breaks up, on the one hand, into the physical phenomenon
forming the physical side of the expression, and, on the other hand, into the
acts which give it meaning and possibly also intuitive fulness, in which its
relation to an expressed object is constituted. In virtue of such acts, the
expression is more than a merely sounded word. It means something, and in
so far as it means something, it relates to what is objective. This objective
somewhat can either be actually present through accompanying intuitions,
or may at least appear in representation, e.g. in a mental image, and where
this happens the relation to an object is realized. Alternatively this need not
occur: the expression functions signiﬁcantly, it remains more than mere
sound of words, but it lacks any basic intuition that will give it its object.
The relation of expression to object is now unrealized as being conﬁned to a
mere meaning-intention. A name, e.g., names its object whatever the circumstances, in so far as it means that object. But if the object is not intuitively
before one, and so not before one as a named or meant object, mere meaning is all there is to it. If the originally empty meaning-intention is now
fulﬁlled, the relation to an object is realized, the naming becomes an actual,
conscious relation between name and object named.
Let us take our stand on this fundamental distinction between meaningintentions void of intuition and those which are intuitively fulﬁlled: if we
leave aside the sensuous acts in which the expression, qua mere sound of
words, makes its appearance, we shall have to distinguish between two
acts or sets of acts. We shall, on the one hand, have acts essential to the
expression if it is to be an expression at all, i.e. a verbal sound infused with
sense. These acts we shall call the meaning-conferring acts or the meaningintentions. But we shall, on the other hand, have acts, not essential to the
expression as such, which stand to it in the logically basic relation of fulﬁlling (conﬁrming, illustrating) it more or less adequately, and so actualizing
its relation to its object. These acts, which become fused with the meaningconferring acts in the unity of knowledge or fulﬁlment, we call the meaningfulﬁlling acts. The briefer expression ‘meaning-fulﬁlment’ can only be used
in cases where there is no risk of the ready confusion with the whole experience in which a meaning-intention ﬁnds fulﬁlment in its correlated intuition.
In the realized relation of the expression to its objective correlate,1 the senseinformed expression becomes one with the act of meaning-fulﬁlment. The
sounded word is ﬁrst made one with the meaning-intention, and this in its
turn is made one (as intentions in general are made one with their fulﬁlments)
with its corresponding meaning-fulﬁlment. The word ‘expression’ is normally understood – wherever, that is, we do not speak of a ‘mere’ expression
– as the sense-animated expression. One should not, therefore, properly say
(as one often does) that an expression expresses its meaning (its intention).

110 Expression and meaning

One might more properly adopt the alternative way of speaking according to which the fulﬁlling act appears as the act expressed by the complete
expression: we may e.g., say, that a statement ‘gives expression’ to an act of
perceiving or imagining. We need not here point out that both meaningconferring and meaning-fulﬁlling acts have a part to play in intimation in
the case of communicative discourse. The former in fact constitute the
inmost core of intimation. To make them known to the hearer is the prime
aim of our communicative intention, for only in so far as the hearer attributes them to the speaker will he understand the latter.

§10 The phenomenological unity of these acts
The above distinguished acts involving the expression’s appearance, on the
one hand, and the meaning-intention and possible meaning-fulﬁlment, on
the other, do not constitute a mere aggregate of simultaneously given items
in consciousness. They rather form an intimately fused unity of peculiar
character. Everyone’s personal experience bears witness to the differing
weight of the two constituents, which reﬂects the asymmetry of the relation
between an expression and the object which (through its meaning) it expresses
or names. Both are ‘lived through’, the presentation of the word and the
sense-giving act: but, while we experience the former, we do not live in such
a presentation at all, but solely in enacting its sense, its meaning. And in so
far as we do this, and yield ourselves to enacting the meaning-intention and
its further fulﬁlment, our whole interest centres upon the object intended in
our intention, and named by its means. (These two ways of speaking have in
fact the same meaning.) The function of a word (or rather of an intuitive
word-presentation) is to awaken a sense-conferring act in ourselves, to point
to what is intended, or perhaps given intuitive fulﬁlment in this act, and to
guide our interest exclusively in this direction.
Such pointing is not to be described as the mere objective fact of a regular
diversion of interest from one thing to another. The fact that two presented
objects A and B are so linked by some secret psychological coordination
that the presentation of A regularly arouses the presentation of B, and that
interest is thereby shifted from A to B – such a fact does not make A the
expression of the presentation of B. To be an expression is rather a descriptive aspect of the experienced unity of sign and thing signiﬁed.
What is involved in the descriptive difference between the physical signphenomenon and the meaning-intention which makes it into an expression,
becomes most clear when we turn our attention to the sign qua sign, e.g. to
the printed word as such. If we do this, we have an external percept (or
external intuitive idea) just like any other, whose object loses its verbal
character. If this object again functions as a word, its presentation is wholly

Essential distinctions 111

altered in character. The word (qua external singular) remains intuitively
present, maintains its appearance, but we no longer intend it, it no longer
properly is the object of our ‘mental activity’. Our interest, our intention,
our thought – mere synonyms if taken in sufﬁciently wide senses – point
exclusively to the thing meant in the sense-giving act. This means,
phenomenologically speaking, that the intuitive presentation, in which the
physical appearance of the word is constituted, undergoes an essential phenomenal modiﬁcation when its object begins to count as an expression.
While what constitutes the object’s appearing remains unchanged, the intentional character of the experience alters. There is constituted (without need
of a fulﬁlling or illustrative intuition) an act of meaning which ﬁnds support
in the verbal presentation’s intuitive content, but which differs in essence
from the intuitive intention directed upon the word itself. With this act, the
new acts or act-complexes that we call ‘fulﬁlling’ acts or act-complexes are
often peculiarly blended, acts whose object coincides with the object meant
in the meaning, or named through this meaning.
In our next chapter (excised from this edition) we shall have to conduct
additional researches into the question as to whether the ‘meaning-intention’,
which on our view characteristically marks off an expression from empty
‘sound of words’ consists in the mere association of mental imagery of the
intended object with the sounded words, or at least necessarily involves such
an act of fancy, or whether, on the other hand, mental imagery lies outside
of the essence of an expression, and rather performs a fulﬁlling role, even if
only of a partial, indirect or provisional character. In order not to blur the
main outlines of our thought, we shall not here enter more deeply into phenomenological questions. In this whole investigation, we need only do as much
phenomenology as is required to establish essential, primary distinctions.
The provisional description so far given will have shown how complex is
the correct description of a phenomenological situation. Such complexity
appears inevitable once we clearly see that all objects and relations among
objects only are what they are for us, through acts of thought essentially
different from them, in which they become present to us, in which they stand
before us as unitary items that we mean. Where not the phenomenological,
but the naïvely objective interest dominates, where we live in intentional
acts without reﬂecting upon them, all talk of course becomes plain sailing
and clear and devoid of circumlocution. One then, in our case, simply speaks
of ‘expression’ and of ‘what is expressed’, of name and thing named, of the
steering of attention from one to the other etc. But where the phenomenological interest dominates, we endure the hardship of having to describe
phenomenological relationships which we may have experienced on countless occasions, but of which we were not normally conscious as objects, and
we have also to do our describing with expressions framed to deal with
objects whose appearance lies in the sphere of our normal interests.

112 Expression and meaning

§11 The ideal distinctions: firstly, between expression
and meaning as ideal entities
We have so far considered ‘the well-understood expression’ as a concrete
experience. Instead of considering its two types of factor, the expression’s
appearance and the sense-conferring or sense-fulﬁlling experience, we wish
to consider what is, in a certain fashion, given ‘in’ these: the expression
itself, its sense and its objective correlate. We turn therefore from the real
relation of acts to the ideal relation of their objects or contents. A subjective
treatment yields to one that is objective. The ideality of the relationship
between expression and meaning is at once plain in regard to both its sides,
inasmuch as, when we ask for the meaning of an expression, e.g. ‘quadratic
remainder’, we are naturally not referring to the sound-pattern uttered here
and now (hic et nunc), the vanishing noise that can never recur identically:
we mean the expression in specie. ‘Quadratic remainder’ is the same expression
by whomsoever uttered. The same holds of talk about the expression’s meaning, which naturally does not refer to some meaning-conferring experience.
Every example shows that an essential distinction must here be drawn.
If I sincerely say – we shall always presume sincerity – ‘The three perpendiculars of a triangle intersect in a point’, this is of course based on the fact
that I judge so. If someone hears me and understands my assertion, he
likewise knows this fact; he ‘apperceives’ me as someone who judges thus.
But is the judging here intimated the meaning of my assertion, is it what my
assertion asserts, and in that sense expresses? Plainly not. It would hardly
occur to anyone, if asked as to the sense or meaning of my assertion, to
revert to my judgement as an inner experience. Everyone would rather reply
by saying: What this assertion asserts is the same whoever may assert
it, and on whatever occasion or in whatever circumstances he may assert it,
and what it asserts is precisely this, that the three perpendiculars of a triangle
intersect in a point, no more and no less. One therefore repeats what is in
essence ‘the same’ assertion, and one repeats it because it is the one, uniquely
adequate way of expressing the same thing, i.e. its meaning. In this selfsame
meaning, of whose identity we are conscious whenever we repeat the statement, nothing at all about judging or about one who judges is discoverable.
We thought we were sure that a state of affairs held or obtained objectively,
and what we were sure of we expressed by way of a declarative sentence.
The state of affairs is what it is whether we assert that it obtains or not. It is
intrinsically an item, a unity, which is capable of so obtaining or holding.
But such an obtaining is what appeared before us, and we set it forth as it
appeared before us: we said ‘So the matter is’. Naturally we could not have
done this, we could not have made the assertion, if the matter had not so
appeared before us, if, in other words, we had not so judged. This forms
part of an assertion as a psychological fact, it is involved in its intimation.
But only in such intimation; for while what is intimated consists in inner

Essential distinctions 113

experiences, what we assert in the judgement involves nothing subjective.
My act of judging is a transient experience: it arises and passes away. But
what my assertion asserts, the content that the three perpendiculars of a
triangle intersect in a point, neither arises nor passes away. It is an identity in
the strict sense, one and the same geometrical truth.
It is the same in the case of all assertions, even if what they assert is false
and absurd. Even in such cases we distinguish their ideal content from the
transient acts or afﬁrming and asserting it: it is the meaning of the assertion, a
unity in plurality. We continue to recognize its identity of intention in evident acts of reﬂection: we do not arbitrarily attribute it to our assertions,
but discover it in them.
If ‘possibility’ or ‘truth’ is lacking, an assertion’s intention can only be
carried out symbolically: it cannot derive any ‘fulness’ from intuition or
from the categorial functions performed on the latter, in which ‘fulness’ its
value for knowledge consists. It then lacks, as one says, a ‘true’, a ‘genuine’
meaning. Later we shall look more closely into this distinction between
intending and fulﬁlling meaning. To characterize the various acts in which
the relevant ideal unities are constituted, and to throw light on the essence
of their actual ‘coincidence’ in knowledge, will call for difﬁcult, comprehensive studies. It is plain, however, that each assertion, whether representing
an exercise of knowledge or not – whether or not, i.e., it fulﬁls or can fulﬁl
its intention in corresponding intuitions, and the formative acts involved in
these – involves an intention, in which intention, as its uniﬁed speciﬁc character, its meaning is constituted.
It is this ideal unity men have in mind when they say that ‘the’ judgement
is the meaning of ‘the’ declarative sentence. Only the fundamental ambiguity
of the word ‘judgement’ at once tends to confuse the evidently grasped ideal
unity with the real act of judging, to confuse what the assertion intimates
with what it asserts.
What we have here said of complete assertions readily applies also to
actual or possible parts of assertions. If I judge If the sum of the angles in a
triangle does not equal two right angles, the axiom of parallels does not hold,
the hypothetical antecedent is no assertion, for I do not say that such an
inequation holds. None the less it says something, and what it says is once
more quite different from what it intimates. What it says is not my mental
act of hypothetical presumption, though I must of course have performed
this in order to speak sincerely as I do. But it is rather the case that, when
this subjective act is intimated, something objective and ideal is brought to
expression: the hypothesis whose conceptual content can appear as the same
intentional unity in many possible thought-experiences, and which evidently
stands before us in its unity and identity in the objectively-ideal treatment
characteristic of all thinking.
The same holds of the other parts of our statements, even of such as do
not have the form of propositions.

114 Expression and meaning

§12 Continuation: the expressed objectivity
Talk of what an expression expresses has, in the discussion so far, several
essentially different meanings. It relates, on the one hand, to intimation in
general, and especially in that connection to sense-giving acts, at times also
to sense-fulﬁlling acts (if these are present at all). In an assertion, e.g., we
express our judgement (we intimate it), but we also express percepts and
other sense-fulﬁlling acts which illustrate our assertion’s meaning. On the
other hand, such talk relates to the ‘contents’ of such acts, and primarily to
the meanings, which are often enough said to be ‘expressed’.
It is doubtful whether the examples analysed, in our last section, would
sufﬁce even to lend provisional intelligibility to the notion of meaning, if
one could not forthwith introduce a new sense of ‘expression’ for purposes
of comparison. The terms ‘meaning’, ‘content’, ‘state of affairs’ and all
similar terms harbour such powerful equivocations that our intention, even
if expressed most carefully, still can promote misunderstanding. The third
sense of ‘being expressed’, which we must now discuss, concerns the objective correlate meant by a meaning and expressed by its means.
Each expression not merely says something, but says it of something: it
not only has a meaning, but refers to certain objects. This relation sometimes holds in the plural for one and the same expression. But the object
never coincides with the meaning. Both, of course, only pertain to an expression in virtue of the mental acts which give it sense. And, if we distinguish between ‘content’ and object in respect of such ‘presentations’, one’s
distinction means the same as the distinction between what is meant or said,
on the one hand, and what is spoken of, by means of the expression, on the
other.
The necessity of distinguishing between meaning (content) and object
becomes clear when a comparison of examples shows us that several expressions may have the same meaning but different objects, and again that
they may have different meanings but the same object. There is of course
also the possibility of their differing in both respects and agreeing in both.
The last occurs in the cases of synonymous expressions, e.g. the corresponding expressions in different languages which mean and name the same thing
(‘London’, ‘Londres’; ‘zwei’, ‘deux’, ‘duo’ etc.).
Names offer the plainest examples of the separation of meaning from
the relation to objects, this relation being in their case usually spoken of as
‘naming’. Two names can differ in meaning but can name the same object,
e.g. ‘the victor at Jena’ – ‘the vanquished at Waterloo’; ‘the equilateral
triangle’ – ‘the equiangular triangle’. The meaning expressed in our pairs
of names is plainly different, though the same object is meant in each case.
The same applies to names whose indeﬁniteness gives them an ‘extension’.
The expressions ‘an equilateral triangle’ and ‘an equiangular triangle’ have the
same objective reference, the same range of possible application.

Essential distinctions 115

It can happen, conversely, that two expressions have the same meaning but
a different objective reference. The expression ‘a horse’ has the same meaning in whatever context it occurs. But if on one occasion we say ‘Bucephalus
is a horse’, and on another ‘That cart-horse is a horse’, there has been a
plain change in our sense-giving presentation in passing from the one statement to the other. The expression ‘a horse’ employs the same meaning to
present Bucephalus on one occasion and the cart-horse on the other. It is
thus with all general names, i.e. names with an ‘extension’. ‘One’ is a name
whose meaning never differs, but one should not, for that reason, identify
the various ‘ones’ which occur in a sum: they all mean the same, but they
differ in objective reference.
The case of proper names is different, whether they name individual or
general objects. A word like ‘Socrates’ can only name different things by
meaning different things, i.e. by becoming equivocal. Wherever the word has
one meaning, it also names one object. The same holds of expressions like
‘the number two’, ‘redness’ etc. We therefore distinguish equivocal names
that have many meanings from general or class-names that have many values.
The same holds of other types of expression, though in their case talk of
objective reference involves certain difﬁculties in virtue of its manifoldness.
If we consider, e.g., statements of the form ‘S is P’ we generally regard the
subject of the statement as the object about which the statement is made.
Another view is, however, possible, which treats the whole state of affairs
which corresponds to the statement as an analogue of the object a name
names, and distinguishes this from the object’s meaning. If this is done
one can quote as examples pairs of sentences such as ‘a is bigger than b’ – ‘b
is smaller than a’, which plainly say different things. They are not merely
grammatically but also ‘cogitatively’ different, i.e. different in meaningcontent. But they express the same state of affairs: the same ‘matter’ is
predicatively apprehended and asserted in two different ways. Whether we
deﬁne talk of the ‘object’ of a statement in one sense or the other – each has
its own claims – statements are in either case possible which differ in meaning while referring to the same object.

§13 Connection between meaning and
objective reference
Our examples entitle us to regard the distinction between an expression’s
meaning and its power to direct itself as a name to this or that objective
correlate – and of course the distinction between meaning and object itself –
as well-established. It is clear for the rest that the sides to be distinguished in
each expression are closely connected: an expression only refers to an objective correlate because it means something, it can be rightly said to signify or
name the object through its meaning. An act of meaning is the determinate
manner in which we refer to our object of the moment, though this mode of

116 Expression and meaning

signiﬁcant reference and the meaning itself can change while the objective
reference remains ﬁxed.
A more profound phenomenological clariﬁcation of this relation can
be reached only by research into the way expressions and their meaningintentions function in knowledge. This would show that talk about two
distinguishable sides to each expression, should not be taken seriously, that
the essence of an expression lies solely in its meaning. But the same intuition
(as we shall show later) can offer fulﬁlment of different expressions: it can
be categorially apprehended in varying ways and synthetically linked with
other intuitions. Expressions and their meaning-intentions do not take their
measure, in contexts of thought and knowledge, from mere intuition – I
mean phenomena of external or internal sensibility – but from the varying
intellectual forms through which intuited objects ﬁrst become intelligibly
determined, mutually related objects. And so expressions, even when they
function outside of knowledge, must, as symbolic intentions, point to categorially formed unities. Different meanings may therefore pertain to the same
intuitions regarded in differing categorial fashion, and may therefore also
pertain to the same object. But where a whole range of objects corresponds
to a single meaning, this meaning’s own essence must be indeterminate: it
must permit a sphere of possible fulﬁlment.
These indications may sufﬁce for the moment. They must guard in advance
against the error of seriously thinking that sense-giving acts have two distinct sides, one which gives them their meaning, while the other gives them
their determinate direction to objects.2

§14 Content as object, content as fulfilling sense and
content as sense or meaning simpliciter
Relational talk of ‘intimation’, ‘meaning’ and ‘object’ belongs essentially to
every expression. Every expression intimates something, means something
and names or otherwise designates something. In each case, talk of ‘expression’ is equivocal. As said above, relation to an actually given objective
correlate, which fulﬁls the meaning-intention, is not essential to an expression. If this last important case is also taken into consideration, we note
that there are two things that can be said to be expressed in the realized relation to the object. We have, on the one hand, the object itself, and the object
as meant in this or that manner. On the other hand, and more properly, we
have the object’s ideal correlate in the acts of meaning-fulﬁlment which
constitute it, the fulﬁlling sense. Wherever the meaning-intention is fulﬁlled
in a corresponding intuition, i.e. wherever the expression actually serves to
name a given object, there the object is constituted as one ‘given’ in certain
acts, and, to the extent that our expression really measures up to the intuitive data, as given in the same manner in which the expression means it.
In this unity of coincidence between meaning and meaning-fulﬁlment, the

Essential distinctions 117

essence of the meaning-fulﬁlment corresponds with, and is correlative, to
the essence of meaning: the essence of the meaning-fulﬁlment is the fulﬁlling
sense of the expression, or, as one may also call it, the sense expressed by the
expression. One says, e.g., that a statement of perception expresses a perception, but also that it expresses the content of a perception. We distinguish, in
a perceptual statement, as in every statement, between content and object;
by the ‘content’ we understand the self-identical meaning that the hearer can
grasp even if he is not a percipient. We must draw the same distinction in
the case of fulﬁlling acts, in the case, therefore, of perceptions and their
categorial formations. Through these acts the objective correlate of our act
of meaning stands before us intuitively as the very object we mean. We
must, I say, distinguish again, in such fulﬁlling acts, between their content,
the meaning-element, as it were, in the categorially formed percept, and the
object perceived. In the unity of fulﬁlment, the fulﬁlling content coincides
with the intending content, so that, in our experience of this unity of coincidence, the object, at once intended and ‘given’, stands before us, not as
two objects, but as one alone. The ideal conception of the act which confers
meaning yields us the Idea of the intending meaning, just as the ideal conception of the correlative essence of the act which fulﬁls meaning, yields
the fulﬁlling meaning, likewise qua Idea. This is the identical content which,
in perception, pertains to the totality of possible acts of perception which
intended the same object perceptually, and intend it actually as the same
object. This content is therefore the ideal correlate of this single object,
which may, for the rest, be completely imaginary.
The manifold ambiguities in talk about what an expression expresses, or
about an expressed content, may therefore be so ordered that one distinguishes between a content in a subjective, and a content in an objective sense.
In the latter respect we must distinguish between:
The content as intending sense, or as sense, meaning simpliciter,
the content as fulﬁlling sense, and
the content as object.

§15 The equivocations in talk of meaning and
meaninglessness connected with these distinctions
The application of the terms ‘meaning’ and ‘sense’, not merely to the content of the meaning-intention inseparable from the expression, but also to
the content of the meaning-fulﬁlment, engenders a most unwelcome ambiguity. It is clear from previous indications, where we dealt with the fact of
fulﬁlment, that the acts on either side, in which intending and fulﬁlling sense
are constituted, need not be the same. What tempts us to transfer the same
terms from intention to fulﬁlment, is the peculiar way in which the unity of
fulﬁlment is a unity of identiﬁcation or coincidence: the equivocation which

118 Expression and meaning

one hoped a modifying adjective might render innocuous, can scarcely be
avoided. We shall continue, of course, to understand by ‘meaning’ simpliciter
the meaning which, as the identical element in our intention, is essential to
the expressions as such.
‘Meaning’ is further used by us as synonymous with ‘sense’. It is agreeable to have parallel, interchangeable terms in the case of this concept,
particularly since the sense of the term ‘meaning’ is itself to be investigated.
A further consideration is our ingrained tendency to use the two words as
synonymous, a circumstance which makes it seem rather a dubious step if
their meanings are differentiated, and if (as G. Frege has proposed)3 we use
one for meaning in our sense, and the other for the objects expressed. To
this we may add that both terms are exposed to the same equivocations,
which we distinguished above in connection with the term ‘expression’, and
to many more besides, and that this is so both in scientiﬁc and in ordinary
speech. Logical clarity is much impaired by the manner in which the sense
or meaning of an expression is, often in the same thought-sequence, now
looked upon as the acts intimated by it, now as its ideal sense, now as the
objective correlate that it expresses. Since ﬁxed terminological landmarks
are lacking, the concepts themselves run confusedly into one another.
Fundamental confusions arise from these facts. General and equivocal
names are, e.g., repeatedly lumped together, since both can be predicatively
referred to a plurality of objects. Lacking ﬁxed concepts, men did not know
how to distinguish the multiple senses of the equivocal names from the
multiple values of the general ones. Here we also meet with the frequent
unclearness as to the true essence of the difference between collective and
general names. For, where collective meanings are fulﬁlled, we intuit a
plurality of items: fulﬁlment is articulated into a plurality of individual
intuitions, and so, if intention and fulﬁlment are not kept apart, it may well
seem that the collective expression in question has many meanings.
It is more important for us to set forth precisely the most detrimental
equivocations in talk which concerns meaning and sense, on the one hand, or
meaningless or senseless expressions, on the other. If we separate the blurred
concepts, the following list emerges:
1. It is part of the notion of an expression to have a meaning: this precisely
differentiates an expression from the other signs mentioned above. A meaningless expression is, therefore, properly speaking, no expression at all: it is
at best something that claims or seems to be an expression, though, more
closely considered, it is not one at all. Here belong articulate, word-like
sound-patterns such as ‘Abracadabra’, and also combinations of genuine
expressions to which no uniﬁed meaning corresponds, though their outer
form seems to pretend to such a meaning, e.g. ‘Green is or’.
2. In meaning, a relation to an object is constituted. To use an expression
signiﬁcantly, and to refer expressively to an object (to form a presentation
of it), are one and the same. It makes no difference whether the object exists

Essential distinctions 119

or is ﬁctitious or even impossible. But if one gives a very rigorous interpretation to the proposition that an expression, in so far as it has meaning,
relates to an object, i.e. in a sense which involves the existence of the object,
then an expression has meaning when an object corresponding to it exists, and
it is meaningless when no such object exists. Meanings are often spoken
of as signifying the objects meant, a usage that can scarcely be maintained
consistently, as it springs from a confusion with the genuine concept of
meaning.
3. If the meaning is identiﬁed with the objective correlate of an expression, a
name like ‘golden mountain’ is meaningless. Here men generally distinguish
objectlessness from meaninglessness. As opposed to this, men tend to use
the word ‘senseless’ of expressions infected with contradiction and obvious
incompatibilities, e.g. ‘round square’, or to deny them meaning by some
equivalent phrase. Sigwart,4 e.g., says that a self-contradictory formula such
as ‘square circle’ expresses no concept we can think, but that it uses words
to set up an insoluble task. The existential proposition ‘There is no square
circle’, on his view denies the possibility of connecting a concept with these
words, and by a concept he expressly wants us to understand (if we get him
right) the ‘general meaning of a word’, which is just what we mean by it.
Erdmann5 has similar opinions in regard to the instance ‘A square circle is
frivolous’. We should, in consistency, have to apply the word ‘senseless’, not
merely to expressions immediately absurd, but to those whose absurdity is
mediate, i.e. the countless expressions shown by mathematicians, in lengthy
indirect demonstrations, to be objectless a priori. We should likewise have
to deny that concepts like regular decahedron etc., are concepts at all.
Marty raises the following objection to the thinkers just mentioned. ‘If
the words are senseless, how could we understand the question as to whether
such things exist, so as to answer it negatively? Even to reject such an
existence, we must, it is plain, somehow form a presentation of such contradictory material’6 . . . ‘If such absurdities are called senseless, this can only
mean that they have no rational sense’.7 These objections are clinching, in
so far as these thinkers’ statements suggest that they are confusing the true
meaninglessness mentioned above under 1, with another quite different meaninglessness, i.e. the a priori impossibility of a fulﬁlling sense. An expression
has meaning in this sense if a possible fulﬁlment, i.e. the possibility of a
uniﬁed intuitive illustration, corresponds to its intention. This possibility is
plainly meant ideally. It concerns no contingent acts of expression or fulﬁlment, but their ideal contents: meaning as an ideal unity, here to be called
‘intending meaning’, on the one hand, and fulﬁlling meaning, standing to it
in a certain relation of precise adequacy, on the other. We apprehend this
ideal relation by ideative abstraction based on an act of uniﬁed fulﬁlment. In
the contrary case we apprehend the real impossibility of meaning-fulﬁlment
through an experience of the incompatibility of the partial meanings in the
intended unity of fulﬁlment.

120 Expression and meaning

The phenomenological clariﬁcation of these relationships calls for long,
difﬁcult analyses, as will appear in a later investigation.
4. If we ask what an expression means, we naturally recur to cases where it
actually contributes to knowledge, or, what is the same, where its meaningintention is intuitively fulﬁlled. In this manner the ‘notional presentation’,
i.e. the meaning-intention, gains clarity, it shows itself up as ‘correct’, as
‘really’ capable of execution. The draft it makes on intuition is as it were
cashed. Since in the unity of fulﬁlment the act of intention coincides with
the fulﬁlling act, and fuses with it in the most intimate fashion – if indeed
there is any difference left over here at all – it readily seems as if the expression ﬁrst got its meaning here, as if it drew meaning from the act of
fulﬁlment. The tendency therefore arises to treat the fulﬁlling intuitions –
categorially formative acts are here in general passed over – as meanings.
But fulﬁlment is often imperfect – we shall have to devote closer study to all
such possibilities – and expressions often go with remotely relevant, only
partially illustrative intuitions, if with any at all. Since the phenomenological
differences of these cases have not been closely considered, men have come
to locate the signiﬁcance of expressions, even of such as could make no
claim to adequate fulﬁlment, in accompaniments of intuitive imagery. This
naturally led to a total denial of meaning to absurd expressions.
The new concept of meaning therefore originates in a confusion of meaning with fulﬁlling intuition. On this conception, an expression has meaning
if and only if its intention – we should say its ‘meaning-intention’ – is in
fact fulﬁlled, even if only in a partial, distant and improper manner. The
understanding of the expression must be given life through certain ‘ideas of
meaning’ (it is commonly said), i.e. by certain illustrative images.
The ﬁnal refutation of highly attractive, opposed notions is an important
task which requires lengthy discussions. These we shall postpone to the next
chapter, and here go on enumerating different concepts of meaning.

Chapter 3 Fluctuation in meaning and the ideality of unities of meaning

121

Fluctuation in meaning and the
ideality of unities of meaning

§24 Introduction
In our last chapter (excised from this edition) we dealt with the act of meaning. But among the conclusions of our ﬁrst chapter was a distinction between
the act of meaning, on the one hand, and meaning itself, on the other, the
ideal unity as against the multiplicity of possible acts. This distinction, like
the others which go along with it – the distinction between expressed content
taken in a subjective, and the same taken in an objective sense, and, in the
latter respect, the distinction between content as signiﬁcatum and content
as nominatum – are in countless cases undoubtedly clear. This holds of all
expressions which occur in the context of an adequately expounded scientiﬁc
theory. There are, however, cases where the situation is different, which
require particular consideration if they are not to plunge all our hard-won
distinctions back into confusion. Expressions whose meaning shifts, especially
such as are occasional or vague, here raise serious problems. To solve these
problems by distinguishing between shifting acts of meaning, on the one hand,
and ideal units of meaning, on the other, is the theme of the present chapter.

§25 Relations of coincidence among the contents of
intimation and naming
Expressions may relate to the contemporary mental state of the person
using them as much as they relate to other objects. They accordingly divide
into those that also intimate what they name (or what they generally stand
for), and those in whose case named and intimated contents fall asunder.
Instances of the former class are interrogative, optative and imperative sentences, of the latter, statements relating to external things, to one’s own past
experiences, to mathematical relationships etc. If someone utters the wish
‘I should like a glass of water’, this serves to indicate to the hearer the
speaker’s wish, which is also the object of the statement. What is intimated
and what is named here coincide in part. I say ‘in part’, since the intimation
obviously goes further. It extends to the judgement expressed in the words ‘I

122 Expression and meaning

should like etc.’. The like naturally holds of statements about the ideas,
judgements, and surmises of the speaker which are of the forms ‘I imagine
that . . .’, ‘I am of the opinion that . . .’, ‘I judge that . . .’, ‘I conjecture
that . . .’. A case even of total coincidence seems at ﬁrst sight possible, in,
e.g., the words ‘the state of mind intimated by the words I am now uttering’,
though the interpretation of our example breaks down on closer examination. But intimation and the state of affairs asserted fall quite apart in
statements such as ‘2 × 2 = 4’. This statement does not say what is said by ‘I
judge that 2 × 2 = 4’. They are not even equivalent statements, since the one
can be true when the other is false.
One must of course stress that if the notion of ‘intimation’ is given the
narrower sense deﬁned above, the objects named in the above examples are
not among the experiences they intimate. A man saying something about his
contemporary mental state, communicates its presence through a judgement. Only as intimating such a judgement (whose content is that he wishes,
hopes etc., this or that) is the man apperceived by the hearer as one who
wishes, hopes etc. The meaning of such a statement lies in this judgement,
whereas the inner experiences in question are among the objects judged
about. If we limit intimation in the narrower sense to experiences which
carry an expression’s meaning, the contents of intimation and naming remain as distinct here as they are generally.

§26 Essentially occasional and objective expressions
The expressions which name the momentary content of intimation belong
to a wider class of expressions whose meaning varies from case to case. This
happens, however, in so peculiar a manner, that one hesitates to speak of
‘equivocation’ in this case. The same words ‘I wish you luck’ which express
my wish, can serve countless other persons to express wishes having ‘the
same’ content. Not only do the wishes themselves differ from case to case,
but the meanings of the wish-utterances do so too. At one time a person A
confronts a person B, at another time a person M confronts a person N. If
A wishes B ‘the same’ that M wishes N, the sense of the wish-utterances,
which includes the idea of the confronting persons, is plainly different. This
ambiguity is, however, quite different from that of the word ‘dog’ which at
one time means a type of animal, and at another a foot or a grate.1 The class
of ambiguous expressions illustrated by this last example are what one usually
has in mind when one speaks of ‘equivocation’. Ambiguity in such cases
does not tend to shake our faith in the ideality and objectivity of meanings.
We are free, in fact, to limit our expression to a single meaning. The ideal
unity of each of the differing meanings will not be affected by their attachment to a common designation. But how do things stand in the case of
the other expressions? Can we there still stick to self-identical meaningunities, elsewhere made clear in their opposition to varying persons and

Fluctuation in meaning and the ideality of unities of meaning 123

their experiences, when here our meanings must vary with such persons and
their experiences? Obviously we are here dealing with a case of unavoidable
rather than chance ambiguity, one that cannot be removed from our language by an artiﬁcial device or convention.
To promote clearness we shall deﬁne the following distinction between
essentially subjective and occasional expressions, on the one hand, and objective expressions, on the other. For simplicity’s sake we shall deal only with
expressions in their normal use.
We shall call an expression objective if it pins down (or can pin down) its
meaning merely by its manifest, auditory pattern, and can be understood
without necessarily directing one’s attention to the person uttering it, or to
the circumstances of the utterance. An objective expression may be in varying ways equivocal: it may stand in the stated relation to several meanings,
so that it depends on the psychological context (on the chance drift of
the hearer’s thoughts, on the tenor of the talk already in progress and the
tendencies it arouses etc.) which of these meanings it arouses and means. It
may be that a glance at the speaker and his situation may help all this. But
whether or not the word can be understood in one or other of such meanings does not depend on this glance as a sine qua non.
On the other hand, we call an expression essentially subjective and occasional, or, more brieﬂy, essentially occasional, if it belongs to a conceptually
uniﬁed group of possible meanings, in whose case it is essential to orient
actual meaning to the occasion, the speaker and the situation. Only by
looking to the actual circumstances of utterance can one deﬁnite meaning
out of all this mutually connected class be constituted for the hearer. Since
we regularly understand such expressions in normal circumstances, the very
idea of these circumstances, and of their regular relation to the expression,
involves the presence of generally graspable, sufﬁciently reliable clues to
guide the hearer to the meaning intended in the case in question.
Among objective expressions we have, e.g., all expressions in theory, expressions out of which the principles and theorems, the proofs and theories
of the ‘abstract’ sciences are made up. What, e.g., a mathematical expression
means, is not in the least affected by the circumstances of our actual use of
it. We read and understand it without thinking of a speaker at all. The case
is different with expressions which serve the practical needs of ordinary life
and with expressions which, in the sciences, prepare the way for theoretical
results. I mean by the latter expressions with which the investigator accompanies his own thought, or acquaints others with his considerations and
endeavours, with his methodical preparations and his provisional beliefs.
Every expression, in fact, that includes a personal pronoun lacks an objective
sense. The word ‘I’ names a different person from case to case, and does so
by way of an ever altering meaning. What its meaning is at the moment, can
be gleaned only from the living utterance and from the intuitive circumstances
which surround it. If we read the word without knowing who wrote it, it is

124 Expression and meaning

perhaps not meaningless, but is at least estranged from its normal sense.
Certainly it strikes us differently from a wanton arabesque: we know it to
be a word, and a word with which whoever is speaker designates himself.
But the conceptual meaning thus evoked in not what the word ‘I’ means,
otherwise we could simply substitute for it the phrase ‘whatever speaker is
designating himself’. Such a substitution would lead to expressions, not only
unusual, but also divergent in sense, if, e.g., instead of saying ‘I am pleased’
I said ‘Whatever speaker is now designating himself is pleased’. It is the
universal semantic function of the word ‘I’ to designate whoever is speaking,
but the notion through which we express this function is not the notion
immediately constitutive of its meaning.
In solitary speech the meaning of ‘I’ is essentially realized in the immediate
idea of one’s own personality, which is also the meaning of the word in
communicated speech. Each man has his own I-presentation (and with it
his individual notion of I) and this is why the word’s meaning differs from
person to person. But since each person, in speaking of himself, says ‘I’, the
word has the character of a universally operative indication of this fact.
Through such indication the hearer achieves understanding of the meaning,
he takes the person who confronts him intuitively, not merely as the speaker,
but also as the immediate object of this speaker’s speech. The word ‘I’ has
not itself directly the power to arouse the speciﬁc I-presentation;
this becomes ﬁxed in the actual piece of talk. It does not work like the
word ‘lion’ which can arouse the idea of a lion in and by itself. In its case,
rather, an indicative function mediates, crying as it were, to the hearer
‘Your vis-à-vis intends himself’.
We must, however, add something to what has been said. Properly speaking, we should not suppose that the immediate presentation of the speaker
sums up the entire meaning of the word ‘I’. The word is certainly not to be
regarded as an equivocal expression, with meanings to be identiﬁed with all
possible proper names of persons. Undoubtedly the idea of self-reference,
as well as an implied pointing to the individual idea of the speaker, also
belong, after a certain fashion, to the word’s meaning. We shall have to admit
that two meanings are here built upon one another in peculiar fashion. The
one, relating to the word’s general function, is so connected with the word
that its indicative function can be exercised once something is actually presented: this indicative function is, in its turn, exercised for the other, singular
presentation, and, by subsumption, makes the latter’s object known as what
is here and now meant. The former meaning can be called the indicating
meaning, the latter the meaning indicated.
What is true of personal pronouns is of course also true of demonstratives.
If someone says ‘this’, he does not directly arouse in the hearer the idea of
what he means, but in the ﬁrst place the idea or belief that he means something lying within his intuitive or thought-horizon, something he wishes to
point out to the hearer. In the concrete circumstances of speech, this thought

Fluctuation in meaning and the ideality of unities of meaning 125

is an adequate guide to what is really meant. ‘This’ read in isolation likewise
lacks its proper meaning, and is understood only to the extent that it arouses
the notion of its demonstrative function (which we call its indicating meaning). In each case of normal use, its full, actual meaning can only grow out
of the prominent presentation of the thing that it makes its object.
We must grant, of course, that a demonstrative often works in a manner
that can claim equivalence with an objective use. A ‘this’ in a mathematical
context points to something determined in a conceptually ﬁxed manner, that
is understood as meant in this manner, without our needing to regard the
actual utterance. A mathematical exposition, after expressly stating a proposition, may go on to say ‘This follows from the fact that . . .’. Here the
proposition in question could itself have been substituted for the word ‘this’
without greatly altering the sense; this follows from the exposition’s objective sense. One must of course attend to the continuous exposition since, not
the intended meaning, but only the thought of an indication, belongs to the
demonstrative considered by itself. Mediation by indicating meanings merely
promotes brevity and increases mastery over the main drift of one’s thoughtintentions. The same plainly does not apply in the common case where the
demonstrative ‘this’ and similar forms stand for the house confronting
the speaker, for the bird ﬂying up before him etc. Here individual intuition,
varied from case to case, must do duty: it is not enough to look back to previously uttered objective thoughts.
In the sphere of essentially occasional expressions one has also the subjectbound determinations ‘here’, ‘there’, ‘above’, ‘below’, ‘now’, ‘yesterday’,
‘tomorrow’, ‘later’ etc. ‘Here’ (to think out a last example) designates the
speaker’s vaguely bounded spatial environment. To use the word is to refer
to one’s place on the basis of an intuitive, believing presentation of one’s
own person and location. This changes from case to case, and changes
likewise from person to person, though each can say ‘here’. It is again the
general function of the word to name the spatial environment of the speaker,
so that the genuine meaning of the word is ﬁrst constituted in the variable
presentation of this place. The meaning of ‘here’ is in part universal and
conceptual, inasmuch as it always names a place as such, but to this universal element the direct place-presentation attaches, varying from case to case.
In the given circumstances of speech, it acquires heightened intelligibility by
subsumption under the conceptual indicating presentation of ‘here’.
An essentially indicating character naturally spreads to all expressions
which include these and similar presentations as parts: this includes all the
manifold speech-forms where the speaker gives normal expression to something concerning himself, or which is thought of in relation to himself. All
expressions for percepts, beliefs, doubts, wishes, fears, commands belong
here, as well as all combinations involving the deﬁnite article, in which the
latter relates to something individual and merely pinned down by class- or
property-concepts. When we Germans speak of the Kaiser we of course

126 Expression and meaning

mean the present German Kaiser. When we ask for the lamp in the evening,
each man means his own.
Note. Expressions with essentially occasional meaning, as dealt with in
this section, do not ﬁt into Paul’s useful division of expressions into those of
usual and those of occasional meaning. His division is based on the fact
‘that the meaning which a word has in each application need not coincide
with what usage accords in it in and for itself’ (H. Paul, Prinzipien der
Sprachgeschichte, p. 68). Paul has, however, included our essentially occasional expressions in his treatment, for he says: ‘There are some words in
occasional use which are essentially framed to designate the concrete, but
which none the less lack their own relation to a deﬁnite concretum till
individual application gives them one. Here belong personal pronouns,
possessive and demonstrative adjectives, demonstrative adverbs, also words
like “now”, “today”, “yesterday”.’2 It seems to me that occasional expressions
in this sense fall outside of Paul’s deﬁnitory antithesis. For it pertains to the
usual sense of this class of expressions, that they owe their determinate
meaning to the occasion, and are therefore occasional in a somewhat different sense. Expressions of usual meaning (in Paul’s sense) can be divided
into those usually univocal and those usually equivocal, and the latter into
expressions usually varying among deﬁnite meanings assignable in advance
(such as the casual equivoca ‘cock’, ‘bear’ etc.) and those in which this is not
so, since their meaning is oriented in each case to the individual instance,
though the manner of this orientation is a matter of usage.

§29 Pure logic and ideal meanings
Pure logic, wherever it deals with concepts, judgements, and syllogisms, is
exclusively concerned with the ideal unities that we here call ‘meanings’. If
we take the trouble to detach the ideal essence of meanings from their
psychological and grammatical connections, if we try, further, to clear up
their a priori relations of adequacy, founded in this essence, to the objective
correlates that they mean, we are already within the domain of pure logic.
This is clear from the start if we ﬁrst think of the position logic takes up
to the many sciences, the position of nomological science, concerned with
the ideal essence of science as such, or, what is the same, the position of
nomological science, of scientiﬁc thought in general, taken purely in its
theoretic content and connection. It is clear, secondly, when we note that the
theoretic content of a science is no more than the meaning-content of its
theoretical statements, disembarrassed of all contingent thinkers and occasions of judgement, and that such statements are given unity by the theory’s
pattern, which in its turn acquires objective validity through the ideally
guaranteed adequacy of its uniﬁed meaning to the objective correlate meant
by it (which is ‘given’ to us in self-evident knowledge). Undeniably what we
call ‘meaning’ in this sense covers only ideal unities, expressed through mani-

Fluctuation in meaning and the ideality of unities of meaning 127

fold expressions, and thought of in manifold act-experiences, but none the
less clearly separable from such chance expressions and from such chance
experiences of thinking subjects.
If all given theoretic unity is in essence a unity of meaning, and if logic is
the science of theoretic unity in general, then logic evidently is the science
of meanings as such, of their essential sorts and differences, as also of the
ideal laws which rest purely on the latter. Among such essential differences
we have those between meanings which have, and meanings which have no
objects, between true and false meanings, and, among such laws, we have
the pure ‘laws of thought’, which express the a priori connection between
the categorial form of meanings and their objectivity or truth.
This notion of logic as a science of meanings is of course at odds with the
mode of speech and treatment of the traditional logic, which operates with
psychological or psychologically slanted terms such as ‘idea’, ‘judgement’,
‘afﬁrmation’, ‘denial’, ‘presupposition’, ‘inference’ etc., and which thinks it
is really only establishing differences of psychology and tracking down
psychological laws relating to these. After the critical investigations of
our Prolegomena we can no more be taken in by all this. It only shows how
far logic still is from a proper understanding of the objects which make up
its own true ﬁeld of research, and how much it has still to learn from the
objective sciences, whose essence it none the less claims to make theoretically intelligible.
Where the sciences unfold systematic theories, when they no longer merely
communicate the progress of personal research and proof, but set forth the
objectively uniﬁed, ripe fruit of known truth, there is absolutely no talk of
judgements, ideas and other mental acts. The objective researcher of course
deﬁnes his expressions. He says: By ‘vis viva’, by ‘mass’, by an ‘integral’, by
a ‘sine’ etc., this or that is meant. But he only points thereby to the objective
meaning of his expressions, he indicates what ‘contents’ he has in mind,
which play their part as constitutive moments in the truths of his ﬁeld. He is
not interested in understanding, but in the concepts, which are for him ideal
unities of meaning, and also in the truths, which themselves are made up out
of such concepts.
The investigator then propounds propositions, and naturally, in so doing,
he asserts or judges. But he has no wish to speak of his own or of anyone
else’s judgements, but of the correlated states of affairs, and when his critical
discussions concern propositions, he means by the latter the ideal meanings
of statements. He does not say that judgements are true or false, but that propositions are so: his premisses are propositions, and so are his conclusions.
Propositions are not constructed out of mental acts of presentation or belief: when not constructed out of other propositions, they ultimately point
back to concepts.
Propositions are themselves the elements of inferences. Here too there is a
distinction between acts of inferring and their uniﬁed contents, syllogisms,

128 Expression and meaning

i.e. the self-identical meanings of certain complex statements. The relation of
necessary consequence in which the form of an inference consists, is not an
empirical-psychological connection among judgements as experiences, but
an ideal relation among possible statement-meanings, among propositions.
It ‘exists’ or ‘subsists’, i.e. it is valid, and such validity is something without
essential relation to an empirical thinker. If a natural scientist deduces a
machine’s working from the laws of the lever, gravitation etc., he no doubt
experiences all sorts of subjective acts. What, however, he thinks of, and
what he knits together in unity, are concepts and propositions together with
their objective relations. An objective unity of meaning, i.e. one adequate to
the objectivity which is self-evidently ‘given’, thereby corresponds to his subjective thought-connections: this is whatever it is, whether anyone realizes
this in thought or not.
This holds in general. Though the scientiﬁc investigator may have no
reason to draw express distinctions between words and symbols, on the one
hand, and meaningful thought-objects, on the other, he well knows that
expressions are contingent, and that the thought, the ideally selfsame meaning, is what is essential. He knows, too, that he does not make the objective
validity of thoughts and thought-connections, of concepts and truths, as if
he were concerned with contingencies of his own or of the general human
mind, but that he sees them, discovers them. He knows that their ideal
being does not amount to a psychological ‘being in the mind’: the authentic
objectivity of the true, and of the ideal in general, suspends all reality, including such as is subjective. If some scientists at times think differently on this
point, they do so, not in their professional scientiﬁc settings, but on subsequent reﬂection. If, with Hume, we may hold that men’s true beliefs are
better documented by their deeds than by their words, then we may twit
such thinkers with not understanding themselves. They pay no unprejudiced
heed to what they think in their unreﬂective enquiries and demonstrations,
but are led astray by the supposed authority of logic, with its psychologistic
fallacies and subjectively distorted terminology.
All theoretical science consists, in its objective content, of one homogeneous
stuff: it is an ideal fabric of meanings. We can go even further and say that
the whole, indeﬁnitely complex web of meanings that we call the theoretical
unity of science, falls under the very category that covers all its elements: it
is itself a unity of meaning.
If meaning, rather than the act of meaning, concept and proposition,
rather than idea and judgement, are what is essential and germane in science, they are necessarily the general object of investigation in the science
whose theme is the essence of science. Everything that is logical falls under
the two correlated categories of meaning and object. If we speak in the
plural of logical categories, we have only to do with the pure species distinguishable a priori within the genus of meaning, or with the correlated forms
of categorially considered objectivity. In such categories the laws formulable

Fluctuation in meaning and the ideality of unities of meaning 129

in logic have their foundation. We have, on the one hand, such laws as
abstract from the ideal relations between meaning-intention and meaningfulﬁlment, and so from any possible knowledge-use of meanings, and consider only how meanings can be compounded to form novel meanings
(whether ‘real’ or ‘imaginary’).3 We have, on the other hand, logical laws, in
the more emphatic sense, which consider meanings in respect of their having
or not having objects, in respect of their truth or their falsity, their consistency or their absurdity, to the extent that such things are merely determined
by the categorial form of such meanings. Corresponding with these latter
laws, we have equivalent, correlated laws for objects in general, objects determined in thought by mere categories. All valid assertions regarding existence
and truth, that are capable of being framed in abstraction from all material
of knowledge on a mere foundation of meaning-forms, ﬁnd their place among
such laws.

HH

Investigation II

The ideal unity of the
species and modern
theories of abstraction

HH

Introduction

Following the discussions of the last investigation, we grasp the ideal unity
of a meaning in the light of the act-character of signiﬁcation; this signiﬁcation’s peculiar ‘tincture’ distinguishes the meaning-consciousness of a given
expression from that of one which differs in meaning. This does not of
course mean that this act-character is the concrete reality upon whose basis
the meaning as Species is constituted for us. The relevant concrete reality is
rather the total experience of the understood expression, which is informed
by this act-character as its animating ‘tincture’. The relation between the
meaning and the signiﬁcant expression (or its ‘meaning-tincture’) is the same
as the relation, e.g., between the Species Red and a red object of intuitive
experience (or the ‘moment’ of red which appears in this object). When we
mean Red in specie, a red object appears before us, and in this sense we look
towards the red object to which we are nevertheless not referring. The moment
of red is at the same time emphasized in this object, and to that extent we
can again say that we are looking towards this moment of red. But we are
not referring to this individually deﬁnite trait in the object, as we are referring
to it when, e.g., we make the phenomenological observation that the red
moments in the separate portions of the apparent object’s surface are themselves separate. While the red object and its emphasized red moment appear
before us, we are rather ‘meaning’ the single identical Red, and are meaning
it in a novel conscious manner, though which precisely the Species, and not
the individual, becomes our object. The same would apply also to a meaning
in its relation to an expression, and an expression’s meaningful orientation,
whether this expression relates to a corresponding intuition or not.
Meaning as a Species therefore arises out of the above-mentioned background through abstraction, but not through abstraction in that improper
sense by which empiricist psychology and epistemology are dominated, a
sense which altogether fails to seize what is speciﬁc, and whose inability to
do so is even counted as a virtue. The issue of abstraction has a twofold
relevance to a philosophical laying down of the foundations of pure logic. It
is relevant in the ﬁrst place since among the categorial distinctions of meanings which pure logic must essentially consider, we ﬁnd a distinction which

134 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

corresponds to the opposition between individual and universal objects.
But it also has, in the second place, a particular relevance, since meanings
as such, i.e. meanings in the sense of speciﬁc unities, constitute the domain
of pure logic, so that to misread the essence of the Species must in each case
be to strike at the very essence of logic. It will accordingly not be unsuitable
to tackle the problem of abstraction even at this early point in our introductory series of investigations, so as to assure the basic foundations of pure
logic and epistemology by defending the intrinsic right of speciﬁc (or ideal)
objects to be granted objective status alongside of individual (or real) objects.
This is the point on which relativistic, empiricistic psychologism differs from
idealism, which alone represents the possibility of a self-consistent theory of
knowledge.
To talk of ‘idealism’ is of course not to talk of a metaphysical doctrine,
but of a theory of knowledge which recognizes the ‘ideal’ as a condition for
the possibility of objective knowledge in general, and does not ‘interpret it
away’ in psychologistic fashion.

Chapter 1

Universal objects and the
consciousness of universality

§1 We are conscious of universal objects in acts
which differ essentially from those in which we are
conscious of individual objects
Our own position has been indicated above in a few words; its justiﬁcation
should require few additional explanations. All that we maintain – the validity of the distinction between speciﬁc and individual objects, and the difference of the manner in which each type of objects is present to us, is brought
clearly before our consciousness – has the guarantee of self-evidence. This
self-evidence automatically emerges as soon as the relevant presentations
are clariﬁed. We need only refer to cases where individual or speciﬁc presentation are intuitively ‘fulﬁlled’, to be utterly clear as to the sorts of objects
‘meant’ by such presentations, and as to what counts as an essential homogeneity or disparity in their sense. Reﬂection on both classes of acts simply
makes plain whether or not there are essential differences in the manner in
which they are performed.
In the latter regard comparison shows that the act in which we mean the
Species, is in fact essentially different from the act in which we mean the
individual, whether, in this later case, we refer to a whole concrete thing,
or to an individual piece or property attaching to it. There is, of course,
certain phenomenal commonality in either case. In either case the same concrete thing makes its appearance, and to the extent that it does so, the same
sense-contents are given and interpreted in an identical manner, i.e. the same
course of actually given sense and image-contents serves as a basis for the
same ‘conception’ or ‘interpretation’, in which the appearance of the object
with the properties presented by those contents is constituted for us. But the
same appearance sustains different acts in the two cases. In the ﬁrst case it
provides the presentative basis for an act of individual reference, i.e. for an
act in which we apply ourselves to the apparent thing itself, and ‘mean’ this
thing or this feature, this part of the thing. In the latter case it provides the
presentative basis for an act of conception and reference directed to a Species: i.e. while the thing appears, or rather the feature in the thing, it is not

136 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

this objective feature, this feature here and now, that we mean. We mean its
content, its ‘Idea’; we mean, not this aspect of red in the house, but Red as
such. This act of meaning is plainly an act ‘founded’ on underlying apprehensions (see Investigation , §45); a new mode of apprehension has been
built on the intuition of the individual house or of its red aspect, a mode of
apprehension constitutive of the intuitive presence of the Idea of Red. And
as the character of this mode of apprehension sets the Species before us as a
universal object, so too there develop, in intimate connection with such an
object, formations like ‘red thing’ (thing containing an instance of red), ‘this
case of red’ (the red of this house) etc. The primitive relation between Species and Instance emerges: it becomes possible to look over and compare a
range of instances, and perhaps to judge with self-evidence: ‘In all these
cases individual moments differ, but in each the same Species is realized:
this Red is the same as that – speciﬁcally treated it is the same colour – and
yet again this red differs from that one – i.e. individually treated, it is a
different objective individual feature’. This distinction, like all fundamental
logical distinctions, is categorial. It pertains to the pure form of possible
objects of consciousness as such. (See also Investigation , ch. 6f.)

§2 The indispensability of talk about universal objects
The excesses of conceptual realism have led men to dispute, not merely the
reality, but the objectivity of the Species. This is certainly quite wrong. The
question as to whether it is possible or necessary to treat Species as objects
can plainly only be answered by going back to the meaning (the signiﬁcance,
the sense) of the names standing for Species, and to the meaning of the
assertions claiming to hold for Species. If these names and assertions can be
interpreted as making the true objects of our intention individual, if the
intention of the nominal and propositional thoughts which give them meaning can be thus understood, then we must yield to our opponents’ doctrine.
But if this is not so, if the semantic analysis of such experiences, shows that
their direct, true intention is plainly not directed upon individual objects,
and if in particular their universal relation to a range of individual objects is
plainly shown up as merely an indirect pointing to logical connections whose
content (sense) will ﬁrst be unfolded in new thoughts, or which will require
new expressions – then our opponents’ doctrine is evidently false. Now
in fact we cannot at all help distinguishing between individual singulars,
like the ‘things’ of experience, and speciﬁc singulars, like the numbers and
manifolds of mathematics, or like the presentations and judgements (the
concepts and propositions) of pure logic. Number is a concept which, as has
often been stressed, has 1, 2, 3 . . . as its subordinate singulars. A number
is, e.g., the number 2, not any group of two individual objects. If we mean
these, even quite indeﬁnitely, we should also say so; our thought will then at
least march with our expression.

Universal objects and the consciousness of universality 137

The difference between individual and speciﬁc singulars corresponds to
the no less essential difference between individual and speciﬁc universals (or
between individual and speciﬁc universality). These differences at once carry
over into the ﬁeld of judgement, and run through the whole of logic. Singular judgements divide into individually singular judgements such as Socrates
is a man, and speciﬁcally singular judgements such as Two is an even number,
or A Round Square is a nonsensical concept. Universal judgements divide
into individually universal judgements such as All men are mortal, and speciﬁcally universal judgements such as All analytic functions can be differentiated,
or All propositions of pure logic are a priori.
These distinctions and others like them are quite irremovable. We are not
merely dealing with abbreviated expressions: we cannot eliminate such differences through any elaboration or circumscription.
Inspection of each instance will, for the rest, yield the conviction that a
Species really becomes an object in knowledge, and that judgements of the
same logical forms are possible in relation to it, as is the case with individual
objects. We may choose an instance from the group that concerns us particularly. Logical ideas, unitary meanings as such, are, as we said, ideal
objects, whether they present what is universal or what is individual, e.g. the
city of Berlin as an identical sense which recurs in talk and reference, or the
direct idea of the theorem of Pythagoras (whose explicit utterance need not
be carried out), or this very idea the theorem of Pythagoras.
We, from our point of view, would point out that each such meaning
certainly counts as a unit in our thought and that on occasion we pass evident
judgements upon it as a unit: it can be compared with other meanings and
distinguished from them. It can be an identical subject for numerous predicates, an identical term in numerous relations. It can be summed together
with other meanings and can be counted as a unit. As self-identical, it can in
its turn serve as the object for many new meanings. All these things are the
same in its case as in the case of other objects, e.g. horses, stones, mental
acts etc., that are not meanings. A meaning can be treated as self-identical
only because it is self-identical. This argument we ﬁnd unassailable: it
applies of course to all speciﬁc unities, even to such as are not meanings.

§3 Must the unity of the Species be regarded as a
spurious unity? Identity and exact likeness
We wish to follow tradition in upholding a strict view of the identity of the
Species, in contrast with prevailing doctrines which pin their faith on the wide
diffusion of improper uses of ‘identity’. Very often we speak of the same thing
in the case of exactly like things. We speak, e.g., of ‘the same cupboard’, ‘the
same dress’, ‘the same hat’ in the case of exactly similar products framed on
the same pattern, products, i.e., exactly like one another in such respects as
interest us in connection with such things. We speak in this sense of ‘the

138 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

same conviction’, ‘the same doubt’, ‘the same question’, ‘the same wish’ etc.
etc. Such impropriety of usage is thought likewise to be present in talk of
the ‘same Species’ and, in particular, in talk of the ‘same meaning’. We speak
of ‘the same meaning’ (‘the same concept’, ‘the same proposition’) in relation
to a pervasively like meaning-experience, we speak of ‘the same red’ (red in
general) ‘the same blue’ etc., in respect to a pervasively like colouring.
Against this argument I object, that an improper use of identity in the
case of like things, refers us back, through its very impropriety, to a proper
use of the same term, i.e. to an identity. We ﬁnd in fact that wherever things
are ‘alike’, an identity in the strict and true sense is also present. We cannot
predicate exact likeness of two things, without stating the respect in which
they are thus alike. Each exact likeness relates to a Species, under which the
objects compared, are subsumed: this Species is not, and cannot be, merely
‘alike’ in the two cases, if the worst of inﬁnite regresses is not to become
inevitable. If we specify the respect of our comparison, we point by way of
a more general class-term to the range of speciﬁc differences among which
the one which appears in our compared members is to be found. If two
things are ‘alike’ as regards form, then the Form-Species in question is the
identical element, if they are ‘alike’ as regards colour, the Colour-Species is
this element etc. etc. Not every Species has of course an unambiguous verbal
expression, and so at times a suitable expression for a ‘respect’ is lacking,
and to state it clearly might be difﬁcult. We none the less keep it in view,
and it governs our talk of ‘alikeness’. It would of course appear as a total
inversion of the true state of things, were one to try to deﬁne identity, even
in the sensory realm, as being essentially a limiting case of ‘alikeness’. Identity is wholly indeﬁnable, whereas ‘alikeness’ is deﬁnable: ‘alikeness’ is the
relation of objects falling under one and the same Species. If one is not
allowed to speak of the identity of the Species, of the respect in which there
is ‘alikeness’, talk of ‘alikeness’ loses its whole basis.

§4 Objections to the reduction of ideal unity to
dispersed multiplicity
We now direct attention to another point. Should anyone wish to reduce talk
about a single attribute to a subsistence of certain relations of exact likeness,
we ask him to consider the difference which comes out in the following
opposition. We make a comparison between:
1. Our intention, when we grasp any group of intuitively like objects in
unitary fashion, or when we recognize their exact likeness at a single glance,
or when in single acts of comparison we recognize the likeness of one deﬁnite
object to certain others and ultimately to all objects in the group,1 and
2. Our intention when, possibly basing ourselves on the same intuitive
foundations, we apprehend as an ideal unity the attribute which constitutes
the respect in which the things are alike or are compared.

Universal objects and the consciousness of universality 139

It is plain that, in our two cases, the target of our intention, the object
meant and named as subject of our assertion, is quite different. However
many like objects may ﬂoat before us in intuition or comparison, they and
their ‘alikenesses’ are certainly not what we mean in our second case. What
we mean is the ‘universal’, the ideal unity, and not these units and pluralities.
The two intentional situations are utterly different, not merely logically, but
also psychologically. In the second case no intuition of likeness, not even a
comparison, is at all needed. I recognize this paper as paper and as white, and
thereby make clear to myself the general sense of the expressions ‘paper’ and
‘white as such’, but I need not carry out any intuitions of likeness nor any
comparisons. One can say for the rest, no doubt, that these conceptual ideas
would never have arisen had like objects never appeared together, nor been
intuitively related by their likeness. This psychological fact is, however, totally
irrelevant here, where the question weighed concerns what an attribute counts
as in knowledge, and what it should count as in the full light of ‘evidence’.
It is clear, further and lastly, that when we try to make plain an intention to
a Species by somehow presenting singulars as belonging to groups of exact
similars, such presented singulars only comprise a few members of such
groups, and can never exhaust their total range. One may then well ask what
will give unity to this range, what will make it a possible object for awareness
and knowledge, if the unity of the Species altogether lapses, and together
with it the thought-form of ‘allness’, which gives the Species a bearing on
the whole host of A’s represented in our thought, which we refer to through
the sense of the expression ‘the totality of A’s’. To point to the ‘same’
universally shared moment will of course not help us at all. It is numerically
present as often as there are single objects represented within the range of
the Species. How can anything unify if it must itself ﬁrst be uniﬁed?
We can also derive no assistance from the objective possibility of recognizing all members of the range to be like one another: it cannot give unity
to this range for our thought and knowledge. For, as a possibility, it is
nothing for our consciousness, unless we think of it and grasp it. But such a
grasp would, on the one hand, presuppose the thought of the unity of the
range, and this range would itself also confront us as an ideal unity. Each
attempt to transform the being of what is ideal into the possible being of
what is real, must obviously suffer shipwreck on the fact that possibilities
themselves are ideal objects. Possibilities can as little be found in the real
world, as can numbers in general, or triangles in general.
The empiricistic attempt to dispense with Species as objects by having
recourse to their extensions can therefore not be carried out. It cannot tell
us what gives unity to such extensions. The following objection makes this
particularly clear. The conception we are criticizing operates with ‘circles of
similars’, but makes too much light of the difﬁculty that each object belongs
to a plurality of ‘circles of similars’, and that we must be in a position to say
what distinguishes these ‘circles of similars’ among themselves. It is plain

140 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

that, in default of a previously given Speciﬁc Unity, we cannot avoid a
regress in inﬁnitum. An object A is similar to other objects, to one object in
the respect a, to another in the respect b etc. But such ‘respects’ do not
imply that a Species is there, which effects unity. What then uniﬁes the circle
of similars determined, e.g., by Redness, as against the circle determined by
Triangularity? The empiricistic conception only says: These are differing
similarities. If A and B are similar in respect of red, and A and C in respect
of triangularity, these similarities must differ in kind. But here we again
come up against kinds. Similarities are compared, and form genera and
species, just as their absolute members do. We should then have to have
recourse to similarities of such similarities, and so on in inﬁnitum.

§6 Transition to the following chapters
We have, in our last treatment, been forced to react critically to conceptions
opposed to ours. In this we encountered a line of thought common to all
forms of empiricistic theories of abstraction, however much they may otherwise differ in content. It seems necessary, however, to grant greater play to
such criticism, so as to draw more proﬁt from our conception of the essence
of universal objects and universal presentations, in analysing and testing the
various main types of modern theories of abstraction. Critically to point out
errors in other thinkers’ views will provide an opportunity to round off and
complete our own conception, and at the same time to test its reliability.
The empiricistic ‘theory2 of abstraction’, like most parts of modern epistemological theory, suffers from the mixture of two essentially different
scientiﬁc interests, one concerned with the psychological explanation of experiences, the other with the ‘logical’ classiﬁcation of their thought-content or
sense, and the criticism of their possible achievement as acts of knowing. In
the former regard we seek to establish empirical bonds tying the thoughtexperiences in question to other facts in the ﬂux of real happenings, facts
responsible for them causally, or on which they exert effects. In the latter
regard we are intent upon the ‘origin of the concepts’ which pertain to our
words: we seek to clarify their ‘true meaning’ or signiﬁcance through plainly
establishing their intention in the sense of their fulﬁlments, which are ﬁrst
realized when suitable intuitions are adduced. To study the essence of these
phenomenological connections is to lay bare the indispensable foundation
for an epistemological clariﬁcation of the ‘possibility’ of knowledge. It is
also, in our case, to give essential clearness to the possibility of making valid
assertions regarding universal objects (or regarding individual objects as
objects of corresponding universal concepts) and, in connection therewith,
to set forth in self-evident fashion the correct sense in which a universal
counts as an ‘entity’, and an individual as a thing ranged under universal
predicates. If a theory of abstraction is to have an epistemological function, if
it is to clarify knowledge, it must set forth the immediate descriptive situation

Universal objects and the consciousness of universality 141

in which a Species comes to consciousness, it must through this clarify the
sense of names of attributes, and thence go on to resolve perspicuously the
many misinterpretations that the essence of the Species has suffered. It will
go astray from the start if it loses itself in empirical-psychological analyses
of the abstractive process and its cause and effects, and if, rapidly dismissing
the descriptive content of the abstractive consciousness, it directs its main
concern to unconscious dispositions and hypothetical associative linkages.
What generally happens in such cases is that the essential immanent content
of the consciousness of universality, which could have been classiﬁed properly without more ado, goes disregarded and unmentioned.
And, even if a theory of abstraction aims at the ﬁeld of what is immanently discoverable in all true (and therefore intuitive) abstraction, and steers
clear of the misguided confusion between essential (i.e. epistemologically
clarifying) and empirical (i.e. psychologically explanatory) analysis, it will
still go astray from the start if it falls into the other confusion (strongly
suggested by ambiguous talk of ‘general representation’) between phenomenological and objective analysis. What our acts of meaning merely assign to
their objects, will be assigned to these acts themselves as their real (reelles)
constituent. Here the regulative ﬁeld of consciousness and its immanent
essence are again covertly abandoned, and all given over to confusion.
The following analyses will show that our sketchy characterization ﬁts the
most inﬂuential modern theories of abstraction, and that these really go
astray for reasons that we have just summarily stated.

142 The ideal
Chapter
2 unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

The psychological hypostatization
of the universal

§7 The metaphysical and psychological
hypostatization of the universal. Nominalism
Two misunderstandings have dominated the development of doctrines concerning universal objects:
First: the metaphysical hypostatization of the universal, the assumption
that the Species really exists externally to thought.
Secondly: the psychological hypostatization of the universal, the assumption that Species really exists in thought.
The older nominalism, whether of an extreme or a conceptualistic type,
attacked the ﬁrst misunderstanding, the misunderstanding which underlies
Platonic realism (in the sense in which this is traditionally conceived). To
combat the second misunderstanding, especially in the form of Locke’s
abstract ideas, has inspired the development of the modern theory of abstraction since Berkeley’s time, and has given it its deﬁnite trend towards extreme
nominalism (which is now usually called ‘nominalism’ simpliciter, and
opposed to conceptualism). It was thought needful, to avoid the absurdities
of Locke’s abstract ideas, altogether to reject universal objects as peculiar
thought-unities, and universal presentations as peculiar acts of thought. Ignoring the difference between universal intuitions on the one hand – among
which not only such abstract ideas, but the general images of traditional
logic belong – and universal meanings on the other, men rejected ‘conceptual
presentations’, with their peculiar presentative intentions, if not in word,
then at least in the sense of these words, and replaced them by individual
presentations merely functioning in an extraordinary manner.
Nominalism therefore adds itself, as a third misunderstanding, to our
previous two: in various forms it seeks to transform what is universal in
object and act of thought, into what is individual.
These misunderstandings, in so far as they are still of actual interest, must
be gone through in order. It lies in the nature of our subject-matter, as
our discussions up to this point have made plain, that we cannot separate
vexed issues regarding the essence of universal objects from issues regard-

The psychological hypostatization of the universal 143

ing the essence of universal presentations. It is vain to seek to make out a
persuasive case validating talk about universal objects, if one does not also
remove doubts as to how such objects can be presented, and if one does not
further refute theories apparently proving, by scientiﬁc psychological analysis,
that only individual presentations exist, that only individual objects therefore
can be, and ever have been brought to consciousness, and that talk about
universal objects can only be understood as ﬁctitious or as gravely improper.
We may leave aside, as long disposed of, the misunderstandings of Platonic
realism. But the thought-motives pressing towards a psychologizing realism are
obviously still operative, as appears particularly in the manner in which Locke
tends to be criticized. We must go deeper into such motives in this chapter.

§8 A deceptive line of thought
The following line of thought might be opposed to our conception, not so
much out of serious conviction, as in order to give an apagogic proof of the
untenability of talk about Species as universal objects:
If Species are nothing real (reales), and if they are also nothing in thought,
then they are nothing at all. How can we talk about something if it does not
at least exist in our thought? The being of the ideal is therefore obviously a
being in consciousness; the name ‘content of consciousness’ rightly applies
to it. As opposed to this, real being (reales Sein) is no mere being in consciousness, or being-a-content: it is being-in-itself, transcendent being, being
outside of consciousness.
We do not wish to lose ourselves in the erring paths of such a metaphysics. For us what is ‘in’ consciousness counts as real (real ) just as much as
what is ‘outside’ of it. What is real (real ) is the individual with all its constituents: it is something here and now. For us temporality is a sufﬁcient mark
of reality. Real being and temporal being may not be identical notions, but
they coincide in extension. We do not, of course, suppose that psychical
experiences are in a metaphysical sense ‘things’. But even they belong to a
thinglike unity, if the traditional metaphysical conviction is right in holding
that all temporal existents must be things, or must help to constitute things.
Should we wish, however, to keep all metaphysics out, we may simply deﬁne
‘reality’ in terms of temporality. For the only point of importance is to
oppose it to the timeless ‘being’ of the ideal.
It is further clear that the universal, as often as we speak of it, is a thing
thought of by us: it is not therefore a thought-content in the sense of a real
(realen)1 constituent in our thought-experiences, and likewise not a thoughtcontent in the sense of an intension, but is rather an object that we think of.
Is it not obvious that an object, even when real (real ) and truly existent,
cannot be conceived as a real part of the act which thinks it? And isn’t
even the ﬁctitious and the absurd, whenever we speak of it, something we
think of ?

144 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

It is naturally not our intention to put the being of what is ideal on a level
with the being-thought-of which characterizes the ﬁctitious of the nonsensical.2
The latter does not exist at all, and nothing can properly be predicated of it:
if we none the less speak of it as having its own, ‘merely intentional’ mode
of being, we see on reﬂection that this is an improper way of speaking.
There are, in fact, merely certain necessary and valid connections among
‘objectless ideas’, whose analogy with truths governing ideas having objects,
has prompted this talk of objects merely presented which do not genuinely
exist. Ideal objects, on the other hand, exist genuinely. Evidently there is not
merely a good sense in speaking of such objects (e.g. of the number 2, the
quality of redness, of the principle of contradiction etc.) and in conceiving
them as sustaining predicates: we also have insight into certain categorial
truths that relate to such ideal objects. If these truths hold, everything presupposed as an object by their holding must have being. If I see the truth
that 4 is an even number, that the predicate of my assertion actually pertains to the ideal object 4, then this object cannot be a mere ﬁction, a mere
façon de parler, a mere nothing in reality.
This does not exclude the possibility that the sense of this being, and the
sense also of this predication, does not coincide exactly with their sense in
cases where a real (reales) predicate, a property is asserted or denied of a real
subject. Otherwise put: we do not deny but in fact emphasize, that there is a
fundamental categorial split in our uniﬁed conception of being (or what is
the same, in our conception of an object as such); we take account of this
split when we distinguish between ideal being and real being; between being
as Species and being as what is individual. The conceptual unity of predication likewise splits into two essentially different sub-species according
as we afﬁrm or deny properties of individuals, or afﬁrm or deny general
determinations of Species. This difference does not, however, do away with
a supreme unity in the concept of an object, nor with the correlated concept
of a categorial propositional unity. In either case something (a predicate)
pertains or does not pertain to an object (a subject), and the sense of this
most universal pertinence, together with the laws governing it, also determines the most universal sense of being, or of an object, as such; exactly as
the more special sense of generic predication, with its governing laws, determines (or presupposes) the sense of an ideal object. If everything which has
being is rightly recognized as having being, and as having such and such
a being, in virtue of the evidence with which, in thought, we apprehend it
as being, then without doubt we may not reject the self-justifying claims of
ideal being. No interpretative skill in the world can in fact eliminate ideal
objects from our speech and our thought.

Chapter 3

Abstraction and attention 145

Abstraction and attention

§14 Objections to any and every form of nominalism.
(a) The lack of a descriptive fixation of aims
We see from the above, and from similar expositions, how, despite great
elaboration, no attempt has really been made to pin down what is descriptively given and what demands clariﬁcation, and to relate the two to one
another. Let us once more run through our own undoubtedly clear, natural
train of thought. What we are given are certain differences in the ﬁeld of
names: among others, the difference between such names as name what is
individual, and such as name what is speciﬁc. If we conﬁne ourselves, for
the sake of simplicity to direct names (‘proper names’ in an extended sense
of the word), names like ‘Socrates’ or ‘Athens’, on the one hand, stand
opposed to names like ‘Four’ (the number-Four as a single member of the
number-series), ‘C’ (the note C as one member of the musical scale), ‘Red’
(as the name of one colour), on the other. To these names certain meanings
correspond, and through these we refer to objects. What these named objects
are can, one would imagine, not be in doubt. In the one case it is the person
Socrates, the city of Athens, or any other individual object, in the other case
the Number Four, the note C, the colour Red, or any other ideal object.
What we mean by the signiﬁcant use of words, what objects we name by
them, and what these objects count as when we name them, this no one can
dispute with us. It is accordingly evident that when I say ‘Four’ in the
generic sense, as, e.g., in the statement ‘Four is a prime number relatively to
seven’, I am meaning the Species Four, I have it as object before my logical
regard, and am passing judgement on it, and not on anything individual. I
am not judging about any individual group of four things, nor about any
constitutive moment, piece or side of such a group, for each part, qua part
of what is individual, is itself likewise individual. But to make an object of
something, to make it a subject of predications or attributions, merely differs in name from having a presentation of it, and having a presentation in
a sense which, while not the only one, is none the less the standard one for
logic. We therefore assert with self-evidence: There are ‘universal presenta-

146 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

tions’, i.e. presentations of what is speciﬁc, just as there are presentations of
what is individual.
We spoke of self-evidence, but self-evidence in respect of objective differences of meanings implies that we go beyond the merely symbolic use of
expressions and refer ourselves to corresponding intuitions for ﬁnal correction. Basing ourselves on intuitive presentations, we carry out the fulﬁlments
of meanings corresponding to our merely signiﬁcant intentions, we realize
their ‘genuine’ purport. If we do this in our present case, some individual
group of four units certainly ﬂoats pictorially before us, and to that extent
underlies our presentation and our judgement. But we do not pass judgement on this group of four, we do not mean it in the subject-idea of our
above example. Not the pictured group, but the number Four, the Speciﬁc
Unity is our subject, and it is of this that we say that it is prime relatively to
Seven. Strictly speaking, this Speciﬁc Unity is likewise nothing in, or attached
to, the apparent group, for, if it were, it would be something individual, a
thing here and now. But our reference, though itself existing now, refers to
nothing less than what is now, it refers to Four, the ideal, timeless unity.
Reﬂecting on our experiences of individual and speciﬁc meaning – whether
purely intuitive, purely symbolic, or at once a symbolic and a fulﬁlled signiﬁcant intention – we must now carry out further phenomenological descriptions. Their task would be to lay bare the relations, fundamental to a
clariﬁcation of knowledge, which hold between blind (or pure symbolic
reference) and intuitive (or authentic) reference, and in the case of the latter
to show the varying manner in which individual images function in consciousness, according as we intend what is individual or what is speciﬁc.
This would enable us, e.g., to answer questions as to how, and in what case,
the universal is brought to subjective awareness in the individual act of
thought, and perhaps achieves self-evident givenness, and how it can acquire a connection with the boundless sphere of individual cases ranged
under it, of which we can of course form no adequate pictorial presentation.
In Mill’s exposition, as in all similar expositions, there is no question of
simply recognizing evident data and consequently proceeding on the path
we have just sketched. What should have been a ﬁxed point in reﬂective
clariﬁcation, is pushed aside unnoticed; the theory therefore misses its target, which it had lost sight of before, or rather never clearly seen. What it
tells us may be informative in regard to this or that psychological precondition or component of our intuitively achieved consciousness of universality,
or in regard to the psychological role of signs in directing unitary trains of
thought etc. etc. This has, however, no immediate relevance to the objective
use of universal meanings, and to the undoubted truth enshrined in talk
about universal objects (subjects, singulars) and in predications which relate
to these; that it has mediate relevance must ﬁrst be established. Mill’s conception, like all empiricistic conceptions, can indeed not appeal to such
evident starting-points or goals, since its whole concern is to prove the

Abstraction and attention 147

nullity of what such self-evidence shows to have genuine subsistence, namely
universal objects and the universal presentations in which such objects are
constituted for consciousness. Expressions such as ‘universal object’, ‘universal presentation’ certainly arouse memories of old, burdensome errors. But,
however much they may have been historically misinterpreted, they must
still have a normal interpretation which justiﬁes them. Empirical psychology
cannot teach us this normal meaning: we can learn it only by going back to
the self-evident sense of propositions which are built upon general presentations and which relate to general objects as subjects of their predications.

§15 (b) The origin of modern nominalism as an
exaggerated reaction to Locke’s doctrine of general
ideas. The essential character of this nominalism, and
of the theory of abstraction in terms of attention
The theory of abstraction held by Mill and his empiricist followers, like the
theories of abstraction held by Berkeley and Hume, gets stuck in its attack
on the error of ‘abstract ideas’. It gets stuck by allowing itself to be misled
by the chance circumstance that Locke, in his interpretation of general ideas,
hit on his absurd general triangle: it thinks that serious talk of such ideas
necessarily demands Locke’s absurd interpretation. The fact is overlooked
that this error is especially due to the unclariﬁed ambiguity of the word
‘idea’ (and of the German word Vorstellung), and that what is absurd for
one concept of ‘idea’ is possible and justiﬁable for another. How could
this fact be apparent to Locke’s opponents, when their notion of an ‘idea’
remained in the same obscurity that had misled Locke? In consequence of
this fact, men fell into that modern nominalism, whose essence no longer lies
in the rejection of realism, but of what is, properly speaking, conceptualism. Not
only did men reject the absurd general ideas of Locke, but also general concepts in the full, true sense of the word, in the sense, that is, that is evidently
revealed by an analysis of the objective meaning-content of our thinking as
constitutive of the Idea of what is a unity-for-thought (Denkeinheit).
Such a view is fostered by wrongly interpreted psychological analyses.
We tend naturally to turn our gaze among logical phenomena to whatever
has primary intuitive palpability; we are then misled into taking the inner
pictures which are found to accompany our names as the meanings of those
names. If we become clear, however, that a meaning is merely what we
mean, or what we understand by an expression, we cannot maintain such a
conception. For if meaning consisted in the intuitive individual presentations which ‘illustrate’ the sense of general names, the objects of such presentation, precisely as they are intuitively presented, would be just what we
meant by those names, and each name would be an equivocal proper name.
To cope with such differences, intuitive individual presentations are said to
sustain new psychological functions when they occur in association with

148 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

general names: they determine other trains of ideas, they ﬁt otherwise into
the course of our thoughts, they inﬂuence this course in a different fashion.
All this is quite irrelevant to the phenomenological facts. Here and now,
at the very moment that we signiﬁcantly utter a general name, we mean what
is general, and our meaning differs from our meaning when we mean what is
individual. This difference must be pinned down in the descriptive content of
the isolated experience, in the individually and actually performed general
assertion. What things are causally connected with such an experience, what
psychological consequences may follow from it, all this does not concern us.
Such things concern the psychology of abstraction, not its phenomenology.
The nominalistic currents of our time have certainly threatened to change
our notion of conceptualism so that the nominalism of John Stuart Mill,
avowed by him so decisively, has lately been disputed.1 We should not, however, see it as the essence of nominalism that, in its attempted clariﬁcation of
the sense and theoretical achievement of universals, it loses itself in a blind
associative play of names as mere verbal noises; its essence lies in the fact
that its attempted clariﬁcations overlook the peculiar consciousness exempliﬁed in our living sense of the meaning of signs, in our actual understanding
of them, in the grasped sense of our assertions, and also exempliﬁed in
correlative acts of fulﬁlment, which yield us the ‘true’ Idea of the universal,
the wholly evident ideation in which the universal ‘itself’ is given to us. This
consciousness means what it means to us, whether or not we know anything
about psychology, or about mental antecedents and consequences, associative dispositions, etc. If the nominalist wishes to give an empirical explanation of this consciousness of the universal, as a fact of our human nature, if
he wishes to connect it causally with such and such factors, such and such
previous experiences, such and such unconscious dispositions, we should
not object in principle. We should merely deny the interest, for pure logic and
epistemology, of such empirical psychological facts. Instead of this, however, the nominalist says that to differentiate general ideas from individual
ones, and to oppose the former to the latter, is really to talk senselessly. He
denies that there is abstraction in the sense of a peculiar consciousness of
the universal which lends evidence to general names and meanings: in reality
only individual intuitions exist, some with an interplay of conscious and
unconscious happenings, which never take us beyond the sphere of what
is individual, nor constitute, i.e. bring to awareness and perhaps to selfpresentation, any essentially new sort of objectivity.
Each thought-experience, like every mental state, has, empirically treated,
its descriptive content, as well as its causal antecedents and consequents; it
makes itself felt in the rush of life, and exercises its productive functions. But
in the ﬁeld of phenomenology and, above all, in the sphere of epistemology –
the phenomenological clariﬁcation of ideal thought- and knowledge-unities
– only essence and sense matter: what we mean when we make assertions,
what object is set up for us by our act of meaning as such, in virtue of its
sense, what partial meanings enter essentially into the make-up of our act of

Abstraction and attention 149

meaning, what essential forms and differences it exhibits, and so on. What is
of interest to epistemology, must be shown up exclusively in the content of
the meaning-experiences and the fulﬁlment-experiences themselves, and be
shown up as essential. If we also ﬁnd, in the range of what can be thus
evidently shown up, the distinction between universal presentations and
individual, intuitive presentations (which we undoubtedly do), then no talk
of genetic functions and associations can be relevant to such a distinction,
or contribute a jot to its clariﬁcation.
It carries the matter no further and fails to remove our objections, if, like
Mill, we look on exclusive attention to some single attribute (or dependent
feature) of the intuited object, as being the act which, in our actual consciousness, in the supposed genetic situation, gives the name its ‘generic’
meaning. Though recent thinkers, who share Mill’s ideas without sharing
his extreme empiricist tendencies, may call themselves ‘conceptualists’, thinking that the interest which turns ‘attributes’ into objects will also guarantee
the existence of general meanings – their doctrine is and remains essentially
nominalistic.
Generality remains for them a matter of the associative function of signs,
it consists in the psychologically regulated association of ‘the same sign’
with ‘the same’ objective feature – or rather with the feature which always
recurs in the same determinate form and is at times emphasized by attention. This generality of a psychological function is, however, quite removed
from the generality which belongs to the intentional content of the logical
experiences themselves, or which, described objectively and ideally, belongs
to our meanings and our meaning-fulﬁlments. This last generality escapes
nominalism entirely.

§16 (c) Generality of psychological function and
generality as a meaning-form. Different senses
of the relation of a universal to an extension
To bring complete clearness to this important distinction between generality
of psychological function, and generality as pertaining to a signiﬁcant content itself, we must pay heed to the differing logical functions of general
names and meanings, and in connection therewith to the differing senses of
talk of their generality, or of their relation to a range of particulars.
Let us set the following three forms side by side: an A, all A, A in general,
e.g. a triangle, all triangles, the triangle, the last taken as in the sentence ‘The
triangle is a species of ﬁgure’.2
The expression ‘an A’ can function predicatively as the predicate of innumerable categorical assertions, and the aggregate of the true, or intrinsically
possible assertions of this sort, determines all the possible subjects to which
being an A either actually pertains, or could without contradiction pertain,
in other words the actual or possible ‘range’ (‘extension’) of the ‘concept’ A.
This universal concept A, or the universal predicate ‘an A’, applies to all the

150 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

objects in this range – we take for the sake of simplicity the range to which
it applies truly – i.e., the assertions in the aggregate in question are all true:
there are, phenomenologically speaking, as possibilities, self-evident judgements with a corresponding content. This generality belongs, therefore, to
the logical function of the predicate; it is not represented in the individual
act, the single case where the meaning an A is enacted, or where we mean
the corresponding adjectival predicate. It appears in these only as a form
of indeﬁniteness; the word ‘A’ expresses a form, which evidently pertains
to our meaning-intention or our meaning-fulﬁlment, and is connected with
what either intends. This form is a wholly irreducible moment; its peculiarity
can only be recognized, not explained away by any sort of psychologicalgenetic treatment. Ideally put: the word ‘A’ expresses a primitive logical
form. The same plainly holds of the formation ‘an A’, which likewise represents a primitive logical structure.
The generality of which we are here speaking, belongs, we say, to the
logical function of predicates, it consists in the logical possibility of propositions of a certain sort. We stress the logical character of this possibility, to
show that we are concerned with a possibility that can be seen a priori to
belong to meanings as Speciﬁc Unities, not to psychologically contingent
acts. If we see that Red is a universal predicate, one associable with many
possible subjects, our meaning no longer relates to something whose existence
is in a real (realen) sense governed by those natural laws which govern the
coming and going of experiences in time. We are not talking of experiences
at all, but of the single self-identical predicate Red, and of the possibility of
certain sentences, each single in the same sense, in which this same predicate
occurs.
If we now pass to the form ‘all A’s’, generality pertains to the form of the
act itself. We expressly mean all A’s, to all such A’s our presentation and
predication relates in the universal judgement, though perhaps no single A is
‘itself’ ‘directly’ presented. This idea of a range, is however, no complex of
the ideas of the members of this range; so little is this the case, that such
individual presentations as perhaps ﬂoat before us have nothing at all to
do with the signiﬁcant intention to all A’s. Here also the word ‘all’ points to
a peculiar semantic form: we leave aside the question whether it can be
resolved into simpler forms or not.
If we deal ﬁnally with the form the A (in specie), generality again pertains
to our signiﬁcant content itself. Here, however, we encounter a wholly different sort of universality, the universality of the Species, which, while it
may have the closest logical relations to universality of range, none the less
evidently differs from the latter. The forms the A and all A’s – likewise any A,
no matter which are not the same in meaning: theirs is no mere grammatical
difference, determined in the end by mere verbal noise. They are logically
distinct forms, giving expression to essential differences of meaning. The
consciousness of Speciﬁc Generality must count as an essentially new mode
of ‘presentation’, as one, namely, that does not merely present individual

Abstraction and attention 151

singulars in a new manner, but makes us aware of a new sort of singulars,
i.e. Singular Species. What sort of singulars these are, and how they stand
a priori to individual singulars, or how they differ from these latter, must
of course be gleaned from the logical truths which, grounded in pure
forms, govern both sorts of singulars and their mutual a priori relations
(i.e. their relations of essence or Idea). Here there is no obscurity or possible
error as long as one keeps to the straight sense of these truths, or, what is
the same, to the straight sense of the meaning-forms in question, whose selfevident interpretations are called truths of logic. Only an erroneous sideslip
into psychologistic and metaphysical trains of thought produces obscurity;
it creates pseudo-problems and frames pseudo-theories to solve them.

§17 (d) Application to the critique of nominalism
If we now look back on the nominalistic theory of abstraction, we see from
the above that its main error lies in quite ignoring the irreducible peculiarities of the forms of consciousness (of the forms of our intentions and of
their correlative fulﬁlments). Its defective descriptive analysis makes it blind
to the fact that the forms of logic are no more than these forms of signiﬁcant intention which have themselves been made objects of a consciousness
which treats them as unities, and so turns them into Ideal Species. Generality is also to be found among these forms. Nominalism further confuses the
various concepts of generality that we have separated above. It one-sidedly
prefers the generality which belongs to concepts in their predicative function, as a possibility of associating the same concept predicatively with
several subjects. Being blind to the logically ideal character of this possibility, with its roots in semantic form, it puts psychological associations in
its place, associations necessarily alien to, even incommensurable with, the
predicates and propositions in question. Since it claims to have completely
cleared up the nature of general meanings through such psychological analyses, its confusions grossly distort the generality of universal and speciﬁc
presentations; this generality we saw belonged to the semantic essence of
the individual act as such, as an indwelling meaning-form. What belongs
phenomenologically to the immanent essence of the individual act, is turned
into a psychological play of events, that throw no light, whether as causes
or effects, on the individual act in which the entire total consciousness of
universality comes alive.

§21 The difference between attending to a
non-independent moment of an intuited object and
attending to the corresponding attribute in specie
It will not be proﬁtless to explore the difﬁculties of our contested theory
a little further. Our own conception will become clearer when its whole
contrast with this theory has been worked out.

152 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

Concentrated attention to an attributive moment is looked on as intuitively fulﬁlling (as yielding the ‘true sense’) of the general meaning attaching
to the name of the corresponding attribute. To mean the Species intuitively,
and to perform an act of concentrated attention, are looked on as one and
the same. But how do things stand, we may ask, in cases where we expressly
refer to the individual moment? What differentiates the two types of case? If
we are struck by an individual trait of an object, by its peculiar colouring,
e.g., or by its noble form etc., we pay special attention to this trait, and yet
have no general presentation. The same question applies to complete concrete things. What is the difference between exclusive attention to the individually apparent statue, and the intuitive grasp of the corresponding Idea,
that could be realized in countless real statues?
Our opponents might reply: in individual treatment, individualizing moments enter our sphere of interest, in speciﬁc treatment, they are shut out.
Our interest is conﬁned to what is general, i.e. to a content which in itself
provides no individual distinctions. Instead of pressing our previous objection – whether attention to individuating determinations creates individuality, while inattention destroys it – we ask rather whether, in individual
treatment, we also necessarily mean the individuating moments, which it is
held must be concurrently noticed? Does an individual proper name also
implicitly name individuating determinations, those, e.g., of time and place?
Here is my friend Hans and I call him ‘Hans’. He is no doubt individually
determined, he is always at a particular point in space and time. If these
determinations were, however, concurrently meant, the name ‘Hans’ would
change its meaning with every step that my friend takes, on every occasion
that I address him by name. Such a thing can scarcely be maintained, nor
would one care to take refuge in saying that a proper name is really general.
For the peculiar generality in respect of the varied times, positions, situations of the same individual thing differs in form from the speciﬁc generality
of the thing’s attribute or of the generic Idea ‘thing in general’.
Often enough, at least, we are indifferent to the here and the now in attending to some part or characteristic trait of an object. We do not therefore
consider it in specie, as we certainly do not mean to perform an ‘abstraction’
in the sense of a general presentation.
Perhaps one might here have recourse to the assumption that individuating
determinations are marginally noticed. This cannot give much help. A great
deal is marginally noticed, but is not for that reason really meant. Where the
consciousness of the universal is intuitively achieved, as a true and genuine
abstraction, the individual object of the underlying intuition certainly has a
subsidiary place in consciousness, but is not at all meant. Mill’s talk about
our unconsciousness of the determinations that we abstract from is a useless, strictly speaking an absurd ﬁction.3 In the numerous cases where, looking to some singular intuitive fact, we utter the corresponding generality, the
singular element stays before our eyes, we do not suddenly become blind to

Abstraction and attention 153

what is individual in our case; this certainly does not happen when, e.g., we
look at this jasmine in bloom, and inhaling its scent, say ‘Jasmine has a
heady scent’.
If ﬁnally one grasps at a new evasion and admits that the individuating
element is not specially picked out like the preferred point of our interest,
not even marginally noticed, as are objects lying outside of our main interest, but that it is rather subsidiarily noticed (mitbeachtet), as being part of
our main interest and peculiarly implied in its intention – then the whole
ground of the theory is abandoned. For the theory claimed to make do with
the mere emphasis of regard towards the concrete given object, or a peculiar
feature given in it, and it now ends by postulating a variety of forms of
consciousness that it should surely have dispensed with.

§22 Fundamental deficiencies in the
phenomenological analysis of attention
This leads us at once to the weakest point of the theory; which is to be
found in the question ‘What is attention?’ We are of course not reproaching
the theory for failing to offer us a perfected phenomenology and psychology
of attention, but for failing to clear up the nature of attention to an extent
absolutely required by its aims. It should have ascertained what gives the
word ‘attention’ its unitary sense, in order to see how far its range of application extends, or what the objects in each case are that we can (in a normal
sense) claim to attend to. Above all, it should have inquired into the relation
of attention to the meaning or reference which gives names and other expressions their signiﬁcance. The sort of theory of abstraction just disputed,
is possible only through the Lockean prejudice according to which the
objects to which consciousness in its acts is immediately and properly directed, and the objects, particularly, of attention, must necessarily be mental
contents, real occurrences in consciousness. It seems perfectly obvious that
an act of consciousness can immediately act only on what is actually (wirklich)
given in consciousness, i.e. on contents that it really (reell) includes among
its elements. What is outside consciousness can only be the mediate object
of a conscious act; and this occurs simply when the immediate content of
the act, its primary object, serves as a representation, an image, a sign, of
what is beyond consciousness.
Once accustomed to this mode of approach, one readily tries to clear up
the objective relations and forms inherent in the intention of acts, by looking predominantly to their present conscious contents as their supposedly
immediate objects, and, misled by the seeming intelligibility of talk about
representations and signs, entirely ignores the true, supposedly mediate
objects of the acts. Unthinkingly one credits to contents everything which
acts, in their straightforward reference, place in the object; its attributes, its

154 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

colours, forms etc., are forthwith called ‘contents’ and actually interpreted
as contents in the psychological sense, e.g. as sensations.
How far this whole conception is at odds with the plain phenomenological
situation, and how thoroughly it has debauched epistemology, we shall yet
have many opportunities to observe. Here it may sufﬁce to point out that
when, e.g., we have a presentation or judgement about a horse, it is a horse,
not our sensations of the moment, that is presented and judged about. Our
sensations are only presented and judged about in psychological reﬂection,
whose modes of conception should not be read into the immediate situation.
That an appropriate train of sensations or images is experienced, and is in
this sense conscious, does not and cannot mean that this is the object of an
act of consciousness, in the sense that a perception, a presentation or a
judgement is directed upon it.
This mistaken conception has further had a detrimental effect on the theory of abstraction. Led astray by the seemingly obvious, one takes experienced
contents to be the normal objects to which one pays attention. The concrete
phenomenal thing is treated as a complex of contents, i.e. of attributes
grown together in a single intuitive image. And it is then said of these attributes, taken as experienced mental contents, that their non-independence
precludes their separation from the concretely complete image: they can
only be noticed in the latter. How could such a theory of abstraction intelligibly account for the formation of abstract ideas of that class of attributive
determinations which are indeed perceived, but which by their nature never
are adequately perceived, which cannot be given in the form of a mental
content? I need only mention three-dimensional spatial shapes, in particular
closed surfaces of solids or complete solids, such as the sphere and the cube.
And how does the matter stand with the myriads of conceptual presentations, perhaps realized with the help of sensuous intuition, but which no
intuitive aspect, even from the sphere of inner sense, instantiates? Here one
can certainly not talk of a mere heeding of what is given in (sensuous)
intuition, nor of a heeding of experienced contents.
Our own point of view inclines us ﬁrst to draw a distinction in the sphere
of sensuous abstraction – the sphere usually stressed for simplicity’s sake –
between acts in which an attributive aspect is intuitively ‘given’, and acts
built upon these, which are not mere acts of attention to such an aspect, but
rather acts of a new kind, referring in general fashion to the corresponding
Species. Whether intuition presents the attributive aspect adequately or inadequately, is beside the point. We should then draw the further distinction
between cases of sensuous abstraction, i.e. of an abstraction straightforwardly and perhaps adequately adjusted to sensuous intuition, and cases of
non-sensuous or of at most partially sensuous abstraction, i.e. cases where the
realized consciousness of the universal is at most only partially built on acts
of sensuous intuition, and for the rest on non-sensuous acts, and accordingly related to thought-forms or categories whose nature does not permit

Abstraction and attention 155

of sensuous fulﬁlment. Suitables examples of the former, are unmixed concepts from outer or inner sense, such as colour, noise, pain, judgement, will,
of the latter, concepts such as series, sense, disjunctive member, identity, being
etc. etc. This difference will again seriously engage us in future investigations.

§23 Significant talk of attention embraces the
whole sphere of thinking and not merely the
sphere of intuition
The unitary sense to talk of ‘attending’ so little calls for ‘contents’ in the
psychological sense (as the objects to which we attend), that it ranges beyond the sphere of intuition, and embraces the whole sphere of thinking. It
makes no difference how thought is conducted, whether on an intuitive
basis or in pure symbols. If we are theoretically concerned with the culture
of the Renaissance, with ancient philosophy, with the development of astronomical ideas, with elliptical functions, with curves of the nth order, with
laws of algebraic operations etc., we attend to all these matters. If our judgement is of the form All A’s are B’s, our attention is given to this universal
state of affairs, we are concerned with allness, and not with this or that
single matter. And so in general. Each thought, or at least each consistent
thought, can no doubt become intuitive, to the extent that it is built in a
certain fashion on ‘corresponding’ intuition. But the attention performed
on such an intuition, whether of inner or outer sense, does not amount to
attention to that intuition’s phenomenological content, and just as little
to attention to the object apparent in it. The a certain, or the any, the all
and the each, the and, the or, the not, the if and the then etc., are not things
we can point to in an object of basic sensuous intuition, that can be ‘had’
sensationally or externally represented or painted. Certain acts naturally
correspond to all of them. The words have their meaning; in understanding
them we realize certain forms pertaining to our objective intention. But
these acts are not the objects that we mean: they are the activity of meaning
or presenting, which only becomes objective to psychological reﬂection.
The object we mean is variously the universal state of affairs All A’s are B’s,
or the generic state of affairs The A (in specie) is a B, or the indeﬁnitely
singular state of affairs Any A is a B etc. We do not attend to the individual
intuition, which perhaps accompanies our thought-presentations, and on
which their evidence is founded: we do not attend to those act-characters
which either give our intuition form, or which ﬁnd their fulﬁlment in formed
intuition. What we attend to are the objects of our thinking, the objects and
states of affairs seen by thought in this or that manner, which are revealed
to our insight when we perform such acts on such a foundation. And an
abstraction in which we seize some point of conception or meaning, where
we do not merely look to what is individual and intuitive (perceiving it
attentively and what not), means no more than that we perform certain

156 The ideal unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

thought-acts with insight, acts sometimes of one form and sometimes of
another.
The range of the unitary notion of attention is therefore so wide that it
doubtless embraces the whole ﬁeld of intuitive and cogitative reference
(Meinens), the ﬁeld of presentation (Vorstellens) in a well-deﬁned but sufﬁciently wide sense, which comprehends both intuition and thought. Ultimately it extends as far as the concept: Consciousness of something. To
talk distinctively of attention, as of a certain selectivity in the sphere of
consciousness, takes account therefore of a certain difference which is not
dependent on the species of our mode of consciousness (on the manner of
our consciousness). We have certain ‘presentations’ while not ‘concentrating’
on their objects, but upon the objects of other presentations.
Attending is thus represented as a straightforward, not further describable way in which contents, otherwise lost in the undivided ﬂow of consciousness, achieve separate consciousness, in which they are ‘emphasized’
or ‘discovered’ by us. If, in a similar sense, all differences in the manner of
presentation are denied, attention is then seen as an illuminating and indicative function operating within this ﬁeld. But all this involves an extreme
narrowing of concepts whose wider meanings cannot be eliminated, and to
which one must unavoidably have recourse. Dazed by the confusion between object and mental content, one forgets that the objects of which we
are ‘conscious’, are not simply in consciousness as in a box, so that they can
merely be found in it and snatched at in it; but that they are ﬁrst constituted
as being what they are for us, and as what they count as for us, in varying
forms of objective intention. One forgets that, from the mere ﬁnding of a
mental content, i.e. the pure immanent intuition of such a content, up to the
external perception and imagination of objects neither found immanently
in consciousness, nor capable of being so found, and from these on to the
loftiest thought-formations with their manifold categorial forms and appropriately correlated semantic forms, an essentially single concept runs
continuously: in all cases, whether we intuit in perceptual, fancying or remembering fashion, or whether we think in empirical and logico-mathematical
forms, an intending, or reference (Vermeinen) is present, that aims at an
object, a consciousness is present that is the consciousness of this object.
The mere existence of a content in the psychic interplay is, however, not at
all this being-meant or being-referred-to. This ﬁrst arises when this content
is ‘noticed’, such notice being a look directed towards it, a presentation of
it. To deﬁne the presentation of a content as the mere fact of its being
experienced, and in consequence to give the name ‘presentations’ to all experienced contents, is one of the worst conceptual distortions known to
philosophy. It is without doubt responsible for an untold legion of epistemological and psychological errors. If we stick to the intentional concept of
presentation, which alone sets a standard for epistemology and logic, we
shall be unable to judge that all differences between presentations reduce to

Abstraction and attention 157

differences in their presented ‘contents’. It is clear, on the contrary, and
particularly in the ﬁeld of pure logic, that to each primitive logical form a
peculiar ‘manner of consciousness’, a peculiar ‘manner of presentation’, corresponds. In so far, of course, as each new mode of intentional reference always
in a manner also concerns objects, i.e. constitutes novel forms with which the
object is brought to consciousness, one can no doubt say that all difference
in presentation lies in what is presented. One must carefully note, however,
that there are two sorts of differences in the object, in what is presented,
differences of categorial form and differences in the ‘thing itself ’; this ‘thing’
can be brought to consciousness as the same in a variety of forms. More will
be said on these heads in later Investigations.

158 The ideal
Chapter
4 unity of the species and modern theories of abstraction

Abstraction and representation

§24 The general idea as a device for economizing
thought
There is an error originating from mediaeval nominalism which likes to
represent general concepts and names as mere devices in an economy of
thinking, devices which will spare us the individual consideration and naming of all individual things. The function of concepts, it is said, is to enable
the thinking mind to transcend the limits set it by the unsurveyable multiplicity of individual singulars; their economizations of thinking enable the
mind to reach its goal of knowledge indirectly, as it could never have reached
it directly. General concepts make it possible for us to treat things in bundles
as it were, to make assertions about whole classes of objects at a single ‘go’;
we can therefore talk about countless objects, instead of conceiving and
judging each object ‘on its own’.
Locke brings this thought into modern philosophy when he says, e.g., in
the last part of Book , chapter  of his Essay . . . ‘that men making abstract ideas, and settling them in their minds with names annexed to them,
do thereby enable themselves to consider things, and discourse of them as it
were in bundles, for the easier and readier improvement and communication
of their knowledge; which would advance but slowly were their words and
thoughts conﬁned only to particulars’.1
This exposition reveals itself as nonsensical if one reﬂects that, without
general meanings, one can make no assertions at all, not even such as are
singular, and that one cannot talk of thinking, judging or knowing, in a sense
relevant to logic, on a mere foundation of the direct presentations of individuals. The most ideal adaptation of the human mind to the multiplicity of
individual things, the genuine, effortless realization of adequate individual
conceptions, would not render thought superﬂuous. For performances attainable in this manner are not performances of thinking.
Along intuitive pathways, e.g., no laws come to light. A knowledge of
laws may very well promote the survival of thinking beings, it may usefully
govern the formation of forward looking intuitive presentations, and may

Abstraction and representation 159

be much more useful in this respect than the natural pull of association.
But the relation of the function of thought to the preservation of thinking
beings, i.e. of human beings, has its place in psychological anthropology,
not in the theory of knowledge. What is performed by a law as an ideal
unity, its logical embrace of innumerable instances in a general propositional
meaning, is something that no intuition can perform, not even the universal
intuition of a God. For to intuit is plainly not to think. The perfection of
thought lies doubtless in intuitive, i.e. in ‘authentic’ thinking, in that knowledge in which our thought-intention is ‘satisﬁed’ (as it were) by passing
over into intuition. Even the brief discussions of the previous chapter permit
us, however, to speak of a grave misinterpretation of this fact, when intuition
– understood in the usual sense of acts of external or internal sense – is
regarded as the proper intellectual function, and when the true role of conceptual thought is taken to be its use of indirect devices which economize
intuition, and overcome the all too narrow limits of the latter. Certainly we
are accustomed to using an all-seeing mind as a logical ideal, but only
because we quietly add to its all-seeing capacities, capacities for knowing
and thinking all. We imagine this mind as one not merely active in mere
intuitions, i.e. in intuitions perhaps adequate but none the less unthinking,
but as also casting these intuitions into categorial forms and combining
them synthetically, and ﬁnding in such formed, combined intuitions the
ultimate fulﬁlment of its thought-intentions, thereby realizing the ideal of
all-inclusive knowledge. We shall, therefore have to say: Not mere intuition,
but adequate, categorially formed intuitions, completely accommodated to
thought, or conversely, thought which draws its evidence from intuition,
constitute the goal of true knowledge. The ‘economy of thought’ only makes
sense, and has its rich ﬁeld within the sphere of thought and knowledge: it is
in fact really an economy of knowledge.2

HH

Investigation III

On the theory of
wholes and parts

HH

Introduction 1

The difference between ‘abstract’ and ‘concrete’ contents, which is plainly
the same as Stumpf’s distinction between dependent (non-independent) and
independent contents, is most important for all phenomenological investigations; we must, it seems, therefore, ﬁrst of all submit it to a thorough analysis.
As said in my previous Investigation, this distinction, which ﬁrst showed up
in the ﬁeld of the descriptive psychology of sense-data, could be looked on
as a special case of a universal distinction. It extends beyond the sphere of
conscious contents and plays an extremely important role in the ﬁeld
of objects as such. The systematic place for its discussion should therefore be
in the pure (a priori) theory of objects as such, in which we deal with ideas
pertinent to the category of object, ideas such as Whole and Part, Subject
and Quality, Individual and Species, Genus and Species, Relation and Collection, Unity, Number, Series, Ordinal Number, Magnitude etc., as well as
the a priori truths which relate to these. Here again we cannot allow our
analytic investigation to wait on the systematic development of our subjectmatter. Difﬁcult notions employed by us in our clariﬁcatory study of knowledge, and made to work rather in the manner of a lever, cannot be left
unexamined, till they spontaneously emerge in the systematic fabric of the
logical realm. For we are not here engaged on a systematic exposition of
logic, but on an epistemological clariﬁcation, as well as on the prolegomena
to any future exposition of logic.
To plumb the difference between dependent and non-independent contents, therefore, points so directly to the fundamental questions of the Pure
Theory of Wholes and Parts (which is a part of formal ontology) that we
cannot avoid going into these questions in some detail.

164 On the 1theory of wholes and parts
Chapter

The difference between
independent and non-independent
objects

§1 Complex and simple, articulated and
unarticulated objects
Since the Investigation which follows mainly concerns relations of Parts, we
start off with a wholly general discussion of such relations.
Objects can be related to one another as Wholes to Parts, they can also
be related to one another as coordinated parts of a whole. These sorts of
relations have an a priori foundation in the Idea of an object. Every object is
either actually or possibly a part, i.e. there are actual or possible wholes that
include it. Not every object, on the other hand, need perhaps have parts,
and we have therefore the ideal division of objects into the simple and the
complex.
The terms ‘complex’ and ‘simple’ are therefore deﬁned by the qualiﬁcation of having parts or not having parts. They may, however, be understood
in a second, possibly more natural sense, in which complexity, as the word’s
etymology suggests, points to a plurality of disjoined parts in the whole, so
that we have to call simple whatever cannot be ‘cut up’ into a plurality of
parts, i.e. that in which not even two disjoined parts can be distinguished.
In the unity of a sensory phenomenon we can perhaps discover a wholly
determinate ‘moment’ of redness as well as the generic ‘moment’ of colour.
Colour and determinate redness are not, however, disjoined ‘moments’. Redness on the other hand, and the extension that it covers, are such disjoined
moments, since they have no community of content. They have, we may
say, a mutual association in the widest sense of the word; we have here a
general relation of parts which is that of disjoined parts in a whole, an
association of such parts. It now seems appropriate to call the associated
parts members of the association: but to give so wide a sense to talk about
members of a whole, means to count colour and shape as the associated
parts of a coloured expanse. That goes against linguistic usage. For in such
wholes the parts have relative dependence as regards one another: we ﬁnd
them so closely united as to be called ‘interpenetrating’. It is quite different
in the case of wholes which are broken up, or could be broken up, into

The difference between independent and non-independent objects 165

pieces: in their case talk of members or of articulated structure alone comes
natural. The parts are here not merely disjoined from each other, but relatively independent, they have the character of mutually-put-together pieces.
Even at the start of our discussion, we see that the relations of parts fall
under characteristically different forms: these forms, we suspect, depend on
the cardinal difference between independent and non-independent objects,
which is our theme in the present section.

§2 Introduction of the distinction between
independent and non-independent objects (contents)
We interpret the word ‘part’ in the widest sense: we may call anything a
‘part’ that can be distinguished ‘in’ an object, or, objectively phrased, that
is ‘present’ in it. Everything is a part that is an object’s real possession, not
only in the sense of being a real thing, but also in the sense of being something really in something, that truly helps to make it up:1 an object in itself,
considered in abstraction from all contexts to which it is tied, is likewise a
part. Every non-relative ‘real’ (reale) predicate therefore points to a part of
the object which is the predicate’s subject: ‘red’ and ‘round’, e.g., do so, but
not ‘existent’ or ‘something’. Every ‘real’ (reale) mode of association, e.g.
the moment of spatial conﬁguration, likewise counts as a proper part of the
whole.
The term ‘part’ is not used so widely in ordinary discourse. If we now try
to pin down the limitations which mark off this ordinary, from our notion
of part, we come up against the fundamental distinction called by us that of
independent and non-independent parts. Where one talks of ‘parts’ without
qualiﬁcation, one generally has the independent parts (those referred to as
‘pieces’) in mind. Since each part can be made the speciﬁc object (or, as we
also have frequently said, ‘content’) of a presentation directed upon it, and
can therefore be called an object or ‘content’, the distinction of parts just
mentioned points to a distinction in objects (or contents) as such. The term
‘object’ is in this context always taken in its widest sense.
In ordinary talk of objects or of parts, one of course involuntarily thinks of
independent objects. The term ‘content’ is less restricted in this respect since
‘abstract contents’ are also commonly talked of. But talk of ‘contents’ tends to
move in a purely psychological sphere, a limitation with which we may start
investigating our distinction, but which must be dropped as we proceed.2
As a matter of history the distinction between independent and nonindependent contents arose in the psychological realm, more speciﬁcally in
the ﬁeld of the phenomenology of inner experience. In a polemic against
Locke, Berkeley3 said: We have the ability to recall individual things previously seen, or to put them together or break them down in imagination.
We can imagine a man with two heads, the trunk of a man tied to the body
of a horse, or isolated pieces such as a separated head, nose, ear etc. As

166 On the theory of wholes and parts

opposed to this, it is impossible to form ‘abstract ideas’, to separate the idea,
e.g., of a movement from that of a moving body. We can only abstract,
in the Lockean separative sense, such parts of a presented whole as are in
fact uniﬁed with other parts, but as could also exist without them. Since esse
for Berkeley here always means the same as percipi, this inability to exist
means no more than an inability to be perceived. We must note, further, that
for Berkeley ideas are the things perceived, i.e. contents of consciousness in
the sense of things we really (reell) live through.
We may now make a statement that brings out the essential point of
Berkeley’s distinctions, making use of a readily understandable verbal
change.4
Seen in their mutual interrelations, contents presented together on any
occasion fall into two main classes: independent and non-independent contents.5 We have independent contents wherever the elements of a presentational
complex (complex of contents) by their very nature permit their separated
presentation; we have dependent contents wherever this is not the case.

§3 The inseparability of non-independent contents
To be more precise in regard to this ability or inability-to-be-separatelypresented, we make use of some of Stumpf’s observations – quite insufﬁciently
noticed – and assert the following:6
It is self-evident, in regard to certain contents, that the modiﬁcation or
elimination of at least one of the contents given with them (but not contained in them), must modify or eliminate those contents themselves. In the
case of other contents, this is not at all self-evident; it is not absurd to
suppose them remaining unaffected despite the modiﬁcation or elimination
of all coexistent contents. Contents of the former sort can only be conceived
as parts of more comprehensive wholes, whereas the latter appear possible,
even if nothing whatever exists beside them, nothing therefore bound up
with them to form a whole.
In the sense just laid down every phenomenal thing and piece of a thing is
separably presentable. The head of a horse can be presented ‘on its own’ or
‘cut off’, i.e. we can hold it in our fancy, while we allow the other parts of
the horse, and its whole intuited setting, to alter and vanish at will. Strictly
speaking, the phenomenal thing or its piece, i.e. the sensuous phenomenon
as such, the spatial shape ﬁlled with sensuous qualities, never stays just the
same in descriptive content: but the content of such a ‘phenomenon’ does
not at least involve anything entailing a self-evident, necessary, functional
dependence of its changes on those of coexistent phenomena. This holds, we
may say, of phenomenal objects as such, as well as of the ‘appearances’, in
the sense of the experiences, in which these things appear, as also in respect
of the sensational complexes which are given an objective ‘interpretation’ in
such experiences. Good examples in this ﬁeld are the phenomena of tones

The difference between independent and non-independent objects 167

and chords, of smells and other experiences, that we can readily think of
apart from all relation to existent thinghood.

§4 Analyses of examples following Stumpf
Let us now consider some instances of inseparable contents, e.g. the relation of visual quality to extension, or the relation of both to the ﬁgure which
bounds them. It is doubtless true in a certain sense that these moments can
be independently varied. Extension can stay the same while colour varies
indeﬁnitely, colour stay the same while extent and ﬁgure vary indeﬁnitely.
But, strictly speaking, such independent variability affects only the kinds of
the ‘moments’ in their various genera. While the moment of colour remains
constant in respect of its speciﬁc shade, extension and shape may vary indeﬁnitely in their sub-species, and vice versa. Speciﬁcally the same quality, and
nuance of quality, may be stretched or spread out over every extension, and,
conversely, the same extension may be covered by every quality. Scope,
however, remains for relations of functional dependence among the changes
of such moments, which, be it noted, are not exhausted by the ideal content
of their Species. The moment of colour, as immediate part-content of the
intuited concrete thing, is not the same in the two concrete intuitions, even
when the quality, the lowest differentiation of the genus colour, remains the
same. Stumpf has made the powerful observation:
Quality shares after a fashion in changes of extension. We express this
verbally when we say that colour diminishes, becomes smaller, even to
the vanishing point. Increase and diminution are names for quantitative
changes.
Quality is indeed affected in sympathy with changes in extent,
although its own peculiar manner of change is independent of extent. It
does not thereby become less green or less red: it has itself no degrees,
only kinds, and can in itself neither increase nor diminish, only alter.
But none the less, when we leave quality quite unchanged as regards its
peculiar manner of change, e.g. let it stay green, it still is affected by
quantitative change. And that this is perhaps not an improper or misleading verbal transfer, is shown by the fact that a quality can decrease
to nothing, that in the end mere change of quantity can bring it to nought.7
We accept Stumpf’s observation, only adding that it is not really the
quality that is affected, but the immediate intuitive ‘moment’ falling under
it. Quality must be looked on as a second-order abstraction, just like the
ﬁgure and magnitude of an extension. But just on account of the law here
under discussion, the moment in question can only be named by way
of concepts determined by the genera of Quality and Extension. Quality
is differentiated to the qualitative ‘moment’ now under consideration, by

168 On the theory of wholes and parts

something not contained in the Genus Colour, since we rightly treat the
quality, e.g. the determinate shade of red, as the Inﬁma Species within this
genus. Just so, a determinate ﬁgure is the last difference of the Genus Figure,
though the corresponding immediate, intuitive ‘moment’ is further differentiated. But the combinations among the various last differences of the
Genera Figure and Colour fully determine the ‘moments’ in question, determine
whatever else may be like or unlike them. The dependence of the immediate
‘moments’ therefore means a certain necessary relationship among them,
which is determined purely by their abstracta at the level just above them.
Stumpf adds the following valuable remarks:
From this (i.e. the above described functional dependence of the ‘moments’ of Quality and Extension), it follows that both are in their nature
inseparable, that they in some manner compose a total content, of which
they are merely part-contents. Were they merely items in a sum, one
might possibly think that, absolutely treated, disappearance of Extension might mean the concomitant disappearance of Quality, that they
did not exist apart; but that Quality should gradually diminish and
vanish through the mere diminution and vanishing of Quantity, without
changing in its own fashion as Quality, would be unintelligible . . . they
can in any case not be independent contents. Their nature forbids them
to have an isolated and mutually independent existence in our ideas.8
The same sort of thing could be said of the relation of Intensity to Quality.
The intensity of a tone is not something indifferent or so-to-speak alien to
its quality. We cannot keep the intensity just as it is, while the quality varies
at will, or is allowed to vanish. Eliminate quality and you unavoidably
eliminate intensity, and vice versa. Evidently this is no mere empirical fact,
but an a priori necessity, grounded in pure essence. In the response to change
we have a further analogy to the previously mentioned case: if intensity
steadily approaches the zero-limit, we feel our qualitative impression likewise reduced, even though the quality as such remains speciﬁcally unaltered.
Further examples fully illustrate the ‘moments’ of unity in the intuitive
contents, ‘moments’ built on the elements that we primarily distinguish, by
which such elements are similarly or dissimilarly associated into sensuous
intuitive wholes. The use of such examples gives us our ﬁrst narrower concepts
of a whole, of an association etc., and, further, our distinctive concepts of
various kinds and sorts of wholes, whether present to outer or inner sense.
These ‘moments of unity’ are of course the same as the contents called
‘form-qualities’ by von Ehrenfels, ‘ﬁgural’ moments by myself, and ‘founded
contents’ by Meinong.9 But one needs here a supplementary distinction
between the phenomenological moments of unity, which give unity to the
experiences or parts of experiences (the real phenomenological data), and
the objective moments of unity, which belong to the intentional objects and

The difference between independent and non-independent objects 169

parts of objects, which in general transcend the experiential sphere. The
expression ‘moment of unity’, incidentally recommended to me by Riehl,
has such obvious advantages in virtue of its immediate intelligibility, that it
might well be universally adopted.

§10 The multiplicity of laws governing the various
sorts of non-independent contents
Our discussions so far have shown that there is always an a priori law
governing what is non-independent, having its conceptual roots in what is
universal in the whole and part in question. But this law can be interpreted
and expressed with more or less deﬁniteness. To pin down the concept of
non-independence, it is enough to say that a non-independent object can
only be what it is (i.e. what it is in virtue of its essential properties) in a more
comprehensive whole. At times, however, a non-independent object can
vary in Species: this entails varying the kind of supplementation it requires
for existence. If we say, for example, that the ‘moment’ of sensory quality,
e.g. of sensory colour, is non-independent, and requires a whole in which it
may be embodied, we have only laid down one side of our governing law,
the side of a part which belongs to the Genus Sensory Quality. We have not,
however, laid down the character of the whole, the manner in which such a
‘quality’ is its part, nor the sort of supplement it needs to achieve existence. It
is different when we say that a sensory quality can only exist in a sense-ﬁeld,
and a sensory colour in a visual sense-ﬁeld, or that it can only exist as qualifying an extension. Here the law lays down the other sides as well; the notion
of a visual sense-ﬁeld is given; and it means a particular, deﬁnite sort of whole
among various possible sorts of whole. Just so, the notion of ‘qualifying an
extension’ points to quite speciﬁc possibilities of law-governed inherence
that a non-independent ‘moment’ may have to a whole. The speciﬁc character of this inherence is ﬁxed in general fashion both by the essence of Sensory
Quality and the essence of Extension, but each is contained in its own manner in the essential unity of visual sensation, or of the visual ﬁeld in which
all such unities ﬁnd their place. This manner cannot be further described.
If we ask what differentiates the generic feature of being a sensory ‘moment’,
so as to yield the speciﬁc feature of being a sensory quality, we can give
no answer that helps us; we can point to no additional feature in which the
concept of quality is not included. Just so, if we are asked what must be
added to Colour to produce its Species Redness we can only answer ‘Redness’.
The notion of what is non-independent, with its indirectly, generally characterized deﬁnitory lawfulness, points to many factually determined, variable laws of essence. It is not a peculiarity of certain sorts of parts that they
should only be parts in general, while it remains quite indifferent what they
are conglomerated with, and into what sorts of connection they are ﬁtted.
There are ﬁxed, necessary connections, pure laws deﬁnite in content, which

170 On the theory of wholes and parts

vary with the pure Species of non-independent contents, and accordingly
prescribe one sort of completion to one of them, another sort of completion
to another. The Species associated in these laws, which mark off the spheres
of contingent individuality presupposed by these laws – are occasionally,
but not always, lowest speciﬁc differences. A law, for instance, may prescribe to contents of the Species Colour a connection with contents of the
Species Extension, but it does not prescribe a deﬁnite extension to a deﬁnite
colour, or vice versa. The values of the lowest differences are accordingly not
functionally interrelated. The law only refers to lowest Species, i.e. Species
having the multiplicity of ultimate speciﬁc differences immediately beneath
them. On the other hand, if we consider the dependence of qualitative remoteness on the qualities on which it rests, we ﬁnd it unambiguously determined
by the lowest speciﬁc differences of these qualities, and so again determined
as a lowest difference.
The concept of non-independence accordingly amounts to that of ideal
lawfulness in uniﬁed combinations. If a part stands in an ideally law-bound
and not merely factual combination, it must lack independence; since such a
law-bound combination merely means that a part whose pure essence is of
one sort, can exist lawfully only in association with certain other parts of
these or those suitable sorts. And even where a law tells us of the impossibility, rather than the necessity of an association, where it says, e.g., that the
existence of a part A excludes the existence of a part B as incompatible with
A, our case still reduces to one of non-independence. For an A can only
exclude a B, if both exclusively require the same thing. A colour excludes
another colour, but only if both aim to cover an identical piece of surface,
and both cannot do so completely. To each essential, law-bound exclusion
of a determinate characterization, there corresponds a positive law-bound
requirement of a corresponding characterization and vice versa.

§11 The difference between these ‘material’ laws and
‘formal’ or ‘analytic’ laws
The necessities or laws which serve to deﬁne given types of non-independent
contents rest, as we often have emphasized, on the speciﬁc essence of the
contents, on their peculiar nature. More precisely, they rest on the pure
Genera, Species, differentiae under which, as contingent singulars, nonindependent contents as well as their supplementing contents, fall. If we
conceive of the totality of such ideal objects, we have with them the totality
of pure essences, the essences of all ideally possible individual objects (existences). To these essences correspond the concepts or propositions which
have content, which we sharply distinguish from purely formal concepts and
propositions, which lack all ‘matter’ or ‘content’. To the latter belong the
categories of formal logic and the formal ontological categories mentioned
in the last chapter of the Prolegomena, which are essentially related to these,

The difference between independent and non-independent objects 171

as well as to all syntactical formations they engender. Concepts like Something, One, Object, Quality, Relation, Association, Plurality, Number, Order,
Ordinal Number, Whole, Part, Magnitude etc., have a basically different
character from concepts like House, Tree, Colour, Tone, Space, Sensation,
Feeling etc., which for their part express genuine content. Whereas the former
group themselves round the empty notion of Something or Object as such,
and are associated with this through formal ontological axioms, the latter
are disposed about various highest material Genera or Categories, in which
material ontologies have their root. This cardinal division between the
‘formal’ and the ‘material’ spheres of Essence gives us the true distinction
between the analytically a priori and the synthetically a priori disciplines
(or laws and necessities). The next section will make systematic pronouncements on these matters.
It is now immediately plain, that all the laws or necessities governing
different sorts of non-independent items fall into the spheres of the synthetic
a priori: one grasps completely what divides them from merely formal,
contentless items. Laws of the type of the law of causation, which lay down
the non-independence of changes in what is thinglike and real, or the laws –
generally imperfectly formulated – which assert the non-independence of
mere qualities, intensities, extensions, boundaries, relational forms etc. –
would not be put on a level with a purely ‘analytic’ generalization such as ‘A
whole cannot exist without parts’ or with analytic necessities such as ‘There
cannot be a king (master, father) without subjects (servants, children) etc.’.
We may say in general: correlatives mutually entail one another, they cannot be thought of, or cannot be, without each other. If we set beside these
any deﬁnite propositions of the opposite sort, e.g., ‘A colour cannot exist
without something coloured’ or ‘A colour cannot exist without some space
that it covers’ etc. – the difference leaps into view. ‘Colour’ is not a relative
expression, whose meaning includes the idea of a relation to something else.
Though colour is ‘unthinkable’ without something coloured, the existence
of the latter, and more deﬁnitely that of a space, is not ‘analytically’ founded
on the notion of colour.
The following discussion clears up the essence of the difference.
A part as such cannot exist at all without a whole whose part it is. On the
other hand we say, with an eye to independent parts: A part often can exist
without a whole whose part it is. Obviously this involves no contradiction.
What we mean is that, if the part is treated in respect of its internal content,
its own essence, then a thing having this same content can exist without a
whole in which it exists; it can exist by itself, not associated with anything
else, and will not then be a part. Change in, or complete elimination of
associations, does not here affect the part’s own, peculiarly qualiﬁed content, and does not eliminate its existence: only its relations fall away, the
fact that it is a part. The contrary holds of other sorts of parts: without
any association, as non-parts, they are unthinkable, in virtue of their very

172 On the theory of wholes and parts

content. These impossibilities or possibilities are rooted in the essential
speciﬁcity of the contents. The case is quite different in regard to the analytic
triviality that a part as such cannot exist without a whole whose part it is. It
would be a ‘contradiction’, i.e. a ‘formal’, ‘analytical’ absurdity, to call X a
part where there was no whole belonging to X. Here the inner content of the
part is irrelevant, the underlying ‘formal’ lawfulness of our case has nothing
in common with the material lawfulness of our above cases, and can accordingly not disturb them.
That correlatives as such mutually condition one another certainly points
to certain mutually requiring ‘moments’, it points to the mutually ‘belonging’ relationships and relative properties which we ﬁnd in the case of every
relation. But it does so only with formal indeﬁniteness. The legality which
here obtains is one and the same for all relations as such: it is in fact a
merely formal legality, rooted in mere analytic essences, here in fact in the
essence of relation as a formal category. It takes over none of the material
speciﬁcity of relations and of their members, and discourses merely of ‘certain’ relations and members. It will perhaps say in the simple case of dyadic
relations: If a certain A stands in a certain relation to a certain B, this same
B stands in a certain corresponding (converse) relation to that A; A and B
are here quite freely variable.

§12 Basic determinations in regard to analytic and
synthetic propositions
We may give the following general deﬁnitions:
Analytic Laws are unconditionally universal propositions, which are
accordingly free from all explicit or implicit assertions of individual existence; they include none but formal concepts, and if we go back to such as
are primitive, they contain only formal categories. Analytic Laws stand
opposed to their speciﬁcations, which arise when we introduce concepts with
content, and thoughts perhaps positing individual existence, e.g. this, the
Kaiser. The speciﬁcation of laws always yields necessary connections: speciﬁcations of analytic laws therefore yield analytically necessary connections.
What are called ‘analytic propositions’ are in general analytically necessary
connections. When they imply existential assertions (e.g. If this house is red,
then redness pertains to this house) such analytic necessity relates to that
content of the proposition in virtue of which it empirically speciﬁes the
analytic law, not to its empirical assertion of existence.
We may deﬁne analytically necessary propositions as propositions whose
truth is completely independent of the peculiar content of their objects
(whether thought of with deﬁnite or indeﬁnite universality) and of any possible existential assertions. They are propositions which permit of a complete
‘formalization’ and can be regarded as special cases or empirical applications
of the formal, analytic laws whose validity appears in such formalization. In

The difference between independent and non-independent objects 173

an analytic proposition it must be possible, without altering the proposition’s logical form, to replace all material which has content, with an empty
formal Something, and to eliminate every assertion of existence by giving all
one’s judgements the form of universal, unconditional laws.
It is, e.g., an analytic proposition that the existence of this house includes
that of its roof, its walls and its other parts. For the analytic formula holds
that the existence of a whole W (A, B, C . . . ) generally includes that of its
parts A, B, C . . . This law contains no meaning which gives expression to a
material Genus or Species. The assertion of individual existence, implied by
the this of our illustration, is seen to fall away by our passage into the pure
law. This is an analytic law: it is built up exclusively out of formal–logical
categories and categorial forms.
Having formed the concept of an analytic law and of an analytic necessity, we also have eo ipso formed the concept of a synthetic a priori law, and
of a synthetic a priori necessity. Each pure law, which includes material
concepts, so as not to permit of a formalization of these concepts salva
veritate – each such law, i.e., that is not analytically necessary – is a synthetic
a priori law. Speciﬁcations of such laws are synthetic necessities: empirical
speciﬁcations of course are so also, e.g. This red is different from this green.
What we have said should be enough to make plain the essential distinction between laws grounded in the speciﬁc nature of the contents to which
non-independent factors belong, and analytic and formal laws, which, being
founded purely on formal ‘categories’, are unaffected by all ‘material of
knowledge’.
Note 1 The points here made may be compared with those of Kant, which
in our view do not deserve to be called ‘classical’. It seems to us that these
points satisfactorily dispose of one of the most important problems in the
theory of knowledge, and make a ﬁrst, decisive step in the division of a
priori ontologies. Future publications will carry the enquiry further.
Note 2 It is readily seen that the main concepts dealt with by us in this
section: Whole and Part, Independence and Non-independence, Necessity and
Law, are essentially changed in sense when they are not understood in the
sense of purely conceptual matters of essence, but are given an empirical
interpretation. For the purpose of the investigations which follow, it is not,
however, necessary fully to discuss these empirical concepts and their relation to the pure ones.

174 On the 2theory of wholes and parts
Chapter

Thoughts towards a theory of the
pure forms of wholes and parts

§14 The concept of Foundation and some relevant
theorems
The law stated and applied in the last paragraph of the previous section
(excised from this edition) is not an empirical proposition, and yet not an
immediate law of essence. Like many similar laws, it permits of a priori
proof. Nothing can show up the worth of a strict statement more clearly
than the possibility of giving a deductive proof of such propositions as are
familiar to us in another guise. In view of the great scientiﬁc interest that the
constitution of a deductive theoretical transformation claims in every ﬁeld,
we wish to linger here a little.
Deﬁnitions. If a law of essence means that an A cannot as such exist
except in a more comprehensive unity which connects it with an M, we say
that an A as such requires foundation by an M or also that an A as such needs
to be supplemented by an M. If accordingly A0, M0 are determinate instances
of the pure kinds A or M, actualized in a single whole, and standing in the
relations mentioned, we say that A0 is founded upon M0, and that it is
exclusively founded on M0, if A0’s need for supplementation is satisﬁed by
M0 alone. This terminology can of course be carried over to the Species, by
a quite harmless equivocation. We say further, more indeﬁnitely, that the
two contents or two pure Species, stand in a foundational relationship or in a
relationship of necessary connection. This indeed leaves it open which of the
two possible but not mutually exclusive relationships is meant. The indefinite expression: A0 requires supplementation by, is founded upon a certain
moment, plainly means the same as the expression: ‘A0 is non-independent’.
Proposition 1 If an A as such requires to be founded on an M, every whole
having an A, but not an M, as a part, requires a similar foundation.
This proposition is axiomatically self-evident. If an A cannot be except when
completed by M, a whole including an A but no M cannot satisfy A’s need
for supplementation and must itself share it.

Thoughts towards a theory of the pure forms of wholes and parts 175

As a corollary we can assert the following, making use of the deﬁnition of
our previous section.
Proposition 2 A whole which includes a non-independent ‘moment’, without
including, as its part, the supplement which that ‘moment’ demands, is likewise
non-independent, and is so relatively to every superordinate independent whole
in which that non-independent ‘moment’ is contained.
Proposition 3 If W is an independent part of (and so1 also relatively to) F,
then every independent part w of W also is an independent part of F.
If w needed a supplement M relatively to F, and so had a foundation M0
in the range of F, this foundation would necessarily be included in W. For,
if this were not so, W would require supplementation in respect of M in
conformity with Prop. 1, and since M0 is a part of F, it would, on Prop. 2,
be non-independent relatively to F, which contradicts the assumption. But
in accordance with this assumption, w is an independent part of W, and so
also independent relatively to W: there can therefore be nothing in the range
of W which could serve as a foundation for w, and so also nothing in the
whole range of F.
The proposition before us can also, with suitable changes in symbolization, be expressed as follows:
If A is an independent part of B, and B an independent part of C, A is also
an independent part of C or more brieﬂy: An independent part of an independent part is an independent part of a whole.
Proposition 4 If C is a non-independent part of a whole W, it is also a nonindependent part of every other whole of which W is a part.
C is non-independent relatively to W, i.e. it possesses a foundation in an
M0 belonging to the range of W. This M0 must naturally also appear in the
range of every whole superordinate to W, i.e. every whole which includes W
as a part. C must therefore also be non-independent relatively to each such
whole. (On the other hand, we add, C may very well be independent relatively to a subordinate whole: we need only so draw its boundaries that the
required supplement M is excluded therefrom. A ‘piece’ of an extended
phenomenon in abstracto, but taken as a ‘moment’, is independent relatively
to such extension; this, however, itself lacks independence relatively to the
concrete wholes of the occupied extension.)
Our proposition permits an expression analogous to the previous one, i.e.
if A is a non-independent part of B, and B a non-independent part of C,
then A too is a non-independent part of C.
A non-independent part of a non-independent part is a non-independent
part of a whole.

176 On the theory of wholes and parts

Proposition 5 A relatively non-independent object also is absolutely nonindependent, whereas a relatively independent object may be non-independent
in an absolute sense.
For a proof see the previous section (excised from this edition).
Proposition 6 If A and B are independent parts of some whole W, they are also
independent relatively to one another. For if A required supplementation by
B, or any part of B, there would be, in the range of parts determined by W,
certain parts (those of B) in which A would be founded. A would therefore not
be independent relatively to its whole W.

§21 Exact pinning down of the pregnant notions
of Whole and Part, and of their essential Species,
by means of the notion of Foundation
Our interest in the foregoing treatments was directed to the most general
relations of essence between wholes and parts, or between parts among one
another (i.e. of contents that combine into a whole). In our deﬁnitions and
descriptions on these matters the notion of Whole was presupposed. It is
however possible to dispense with this notion in all cases: for it can be substituted the simple coexistence of the contents that were denominated parts.
One could, e.g., deﬁne as follows:
A content of the species A is founded upon a content of the species B, if an
A can by its essence (i.e. legally, in virtue of its speciﬁc nature) not exist,
unless a B also exists: this leaves open whether the coexistence of a C, a D
etc. is needed or not.
One can proceed similarly with the other deﬁnitions. If all is taken thus
generally, one could then give the following noteworthy deﬁnition of the
pregnant concept of Whole by way of the notion of Foundation:
By a Whole we understand a range of contents which are all covered by a
single foundation without the help of further contents. The contents of such
a range we call its parts. Talk of the singleness of the foundation implies that
every content is foundationally connected, whether directly or indirectly, with
every content. This can happen in that all these contents are immediately or
mediately founded on each other without external assistance, or in that all
together serve to found a new content, again without external assistance. In
the latter case the possibility remains open that this unitary content is built
up out of partial contents, which in their turn are founded on partial groups
from the presupposed range of contents, just as the Whole content is founded
on its total range. Intermediate cases are ﬁnally also possible, where the
unity of foundation is so formed, e.g., that A founds a new content together
with B, B one together with C, C one together with D etc. In such cases the
formation of new unities is in short concatenated.

Thoughts towards a theory of the pure forms of wholes and parts 177

One sees at once how such differences determine essential divisions of the
whole. In the cases ﬁrst referred to, the ‘parts’ (deﬁned as members of the
range in question) ‘interpenetrated’, in the other cases they were ‘mutually
external’, but, whether taken all together, or concatenated in pairs, they
embodied real forms of association. Where one speaks of connections, associations etc. in the narrower sense, one means wholes of the second sort, i.e.
wholes where contents relatively independent as regards one another – where
the whole falls apart into its pieces – serve to found new contents as their
‘combinatory forms’. Talk of wholes and parts tends in general to be
oriented exclusively to such cases.
The same whole can be interpenetrative in relation to certain parts, and
combinatory in relation to others: the sensuous, phenomenal thing, the
intuitively given spatial shape clothed with sensuous quality, is ( just as it
appears) interpenetrative in respect of reciprocally founded ‘moments’ such
as colour and extension, and combinatory in respect of its ‘pieces’.

§23 Forms of categorial unity and wholes
In the sense in which we are here trying to pin down the notion of a whole,
a mere aggregate or mere coexistence of any contents is not to be called a
whole, as little as a likeness (the being of the same sort) or a difference (the
being of another sort, or, in another sense, the not being identical) are wholes.2
‘Aggregate’ is an expression for a categorial unity corresponding to the mere
form of thought, it stands for the correlate of a certain unity of reference
relating to all relevant objects. The objects themselves, being only held together in thought, do not succeed in founding a new content, whether taken
as a group or together; no material form of association develops among
them through this unity of intuition, they are possibly ‘quite disconnected
and intrinsically unrelated’. This is shown in the fact that the form of the
aggregate is quite indifferent to its matter, i.e. it can persist in spite of
wholly arbitrary variation in its comprised contents. A ‘founded’ content,
however, depends on the speciﬁc ‘nature’ of its ‘founding’ contents: there is
a pure law which renders the Genus of the ‘founded’ content dependent on
the deﬁnitely indicated Genera of the ‘founding’ contents. A whole in the
full and proper sense is, in general, a combination determined by the lowest
Genera of the parts. A law corresponds to each material unity. There are
different sorts of whole corresponding to these different laws, or, otherwise
put, to the different sorts of contents that are to serve as parts. We cannot at
will make the same content at one time part of one sort of whole, at another
time part of another sort. To be a part, and, more exactly, to be a part of
some determinate sort (a metaphysical, physical or logical part or whatever)
is rooted in the pure generic nature of the contents in question, and is
governed by laws which in our sense are a priori laws or ‘laws of essence’.
This is a fundamental insight whose meaning must be respected in all our

178 On the theory of wholes and parts

treatments and formulations. And with this insight we have the foundation for a systematic theory of the relations of wholes and parts as regards
their pure forms, the categorially deﬁnable types which abstract from the
‘sensuous’ material of such wholes.
Before we pursue these thoughts, we must remove a further difﬁculty. The
form of an aggregate is a purely categorial form, in opposition to which
the form of a whole, of a unity due to foundation, appeared to be a material
form. But did we not say in the previous section that unity (and we were
talking speciﬁcally of a unity based on foundation) was a categorial predicate? Here we must note that, on our doctrine, the Idea of unity or the Idea
of a whole is based on the idea of ‘Founding’, and the latter Idea upon the
Idea of a Pure Law; the Form of a Law is further as such categorial – a law
is not thinglike, not therefore perceptible – and that to this extent the notion
of a Founded Whole is a categorial notion. But the content of the law
governing each such whole is determined by the material speciﬁcity of the
‘founding’ contents and consequently of the ‘founded’ types of content, and
it is this law, deﬁnite in its content, which gives the whole its unity. For this
reason we rightly call each ideally possible speciﬁcation of the Idea of such
unity a material or also a real (reale) unity.
According to our previous assertions,3 the laws constitutive of the various
sorts of whole are synthetically a priori, as opposed to laws which are analytically a priori, such as those governing pure categorial forms, e.g. the
Form-Idea of a whole as such, and all merely formal speciﬁcations of this
Idea. We prefer to dwell in what follows, on such formal speciﬁcations.

§24 The pure formal types of wholes and parts.
The postulate of an a priori theory
The pure forms of wholes and parts are determined by the pure forms of law.
Only what is formally universal in the foundational relation, as expressed in
our deﬁnition, is then relevant, together with the a priori combinations that
it permits. We rise, in the case of any type of whole, to its pure form, its
categorial type, by abstracting from the speciﬁcity of the sorts of content in
question. More clearly expressed, this formalizing abstraction is something
quite different from what is usually aimed at under the title of ‘abstraction’:
it is a quite different performance from the one which sets in relief the
universal Redness in a concrete visual datum, or the generic ‘moment’ of
Colour in the Redness previously abstracted. In formalization we replace
the names standing for the sort of content in question by indeﬁnite expressions such as a certain sort of content, a certain other sort of content etc. At
the same time, on the semantic side, corresponding substitutions of purely
categorial for material thoughts take place.4
The distinctions between abstract parts and ‘pieces’ are purely formal,
being in this sense drawn in purely categorial fashion, as can be seen at once

Thoughts towards a theory of the pure forms of wholes and parts 179

from our pronouncements above. These pronouncements had however to be
suitably interpreted in accordance with our present leaning towards ﬁnal
formalization: the pure concept of the whole, in the sense of our last deﬁnition, had to be made their basis. The distinction likewise between nearer and
remoter parts that we merely explained, in descriptive fashion,5 by means of
illustrations, can now be reduced to the mere form of certain foundational
relations, and so formalized.
In our examples we saw above that, in the case of many intuitive wholes,
a graded series of fragmentations of such wholes always results in fragments
of these wholes themselves, fragments all equally close to the whole, and
which could with equal justice count as results of a ﬁrst fragmentation. The
sequence of the ‘piecings’ was in these instances not prescribed by the essence of the wholes. What is here relevant is ﬁrst the proposition that pieces
of pieces of a whole are themselves pieces of the whole – a proposition that we
formally proved above6 (in different words). But we were there dealing with
‘pieces’, for which the sequence of fragmentations was meaningless, since it
corresponded to no graded series of ‘foundations’. All pieces always stood to
the whole in the same relation of ‘foundation’. There were no differences in
the form of the relation to the whole, all parts were ‘contained in the whole’
in the same fashion. The matter would be quite different were we to fragment aesthetic unities, e.g. a star-shape built out of star-shapes, which in
their turn are composed of stretches and ultimately of points. The points
serve to ‘found’ stretches, the stretches serve to ‘found’, as new aesthetic
unities, the individual stars, and these in their turn serve to ‘found’ the starpattern, as the highest unity in the given case. The points, stretches, stars
and the ﬁnal star-pattern are not now coordinated as are partial stretches in
a stretch. There is, in their case, a ﬁxed order of ‘foundations’, in which
what is founded at one level serves to ‘found’ the level next above, and in
such a manner that at each level new forms, only reachable at that level, are
involved. We may here add the universal proposition:
‘Pieces’ are essentially mediate or remote parts of a whole whose ‘pieces’
they are, if combinatory forms unite them with other ‘pieces’ into wholes which
in their turn constitute wholes of higher order by way of novel forms.
The difference between the parts nearer or further in regard to the whole
has accordingly its essential ground in the formally expressible diversity of
foundational relations.
The case is similar in regard to non-independent ‘moments’, if we take
account of the essential formal distinction between such ‘moments’ as can
only satisfy their need for supplementation in the complete whole, and such
as can satisfy this need in pieces of this whole. This makes a difference to
the mode of belonging, to the form of foundation: by it certain parts, e.g.
the total extent of the intuited thing, belong exclusively to the thing as a
whole, while other parts, e.g. the extent of a ‘piece’, belong speciﬁcally to
this ‘piece’, and only more remotely to the whole. This mediacy is no longer

180 On the theory of wholes and parts

inessential, as is that of second-level ‘pieces’ in the division of a stretch, but
is an essential mediacy, to be characterized in terms of the formal nature of
the relationship. Obviously similar reasons place ‘pieces’ of non-independent
‘moments’ which pertain directly to the whole, further from the whole than the
‘moments’ are: this at least is the case if the rule holds that we found valid in
the ﬁeld of intuition, that such ‘pieces’ can have their immediate foundation
only in a ‘piece’ of the whole. The wider proposition also can be formally
expressed: Abstract parts are further from the whole, are in essence mediate
parts, if their need for supplement is satisﬁed in the sphere of a mere part. This
part can then well either be a ‘piece’ of the whole, or be in need of further
completion. The mediacy in the latter case consists in the fact that the law of
supplementation in which the form of foundation resides, points, in the case
of the originally mentioned abstract part, to a whole which, in virtue of
a new law of supplementation is, and must be, a part of a more comprehensive whole, i.e. of the complete whole, which accordingly only includes
the ﬁrst part mediately. This permits us also to say that abstract parts of the
whole that are not abstract parts of its ‘pieces’, are nearer to the whole than
the abstract parts of the ‘pieces’.
These thoughts can only be meant, and are only meant, to count as mere
indications of a future treatment of the theory of Wholes and Parts. A
proper working out of the pure theory we here have in mind, would have to
deﬁne all concepts with mathematical exactness and to deduce all theorems
by argumenta in forma, i.e. mathematically. Thus would arise a complete
law-determined survey of the a priori possibilities of complexity in the form
of wholes and parts, and an exact knowledge of the relations possible in this
sphere. That this end can be achieved, has been shown by the small beginnings of purely formal treatment in our present chapter. In any case the
progress from vaguely formed, to mathematically exact, concepts and
theories is, here as everywhere, the precondition for full insight into a priori
connections and an inescapable demand of science.

Investigation IV

The distinction between
independent and nonindependent meanings and
the idea of pure grammar

H

Introduction

In the following discussions we wish to turn our gaze to a fundamental
difference in the ﬁeld of meanings, a difference which lies hidden behind
insigniﬁcant grammatical distinctions, such as those between categorematic
and syncategorematic expressions, or between closed and unclosed expressions. To clear up such distinctions will enable us to apply our general
distinction between independent and non-independent objects in the special
ﬁeld of meanings, so that the distinction treated in our present Investigation may be called that of independent and non-independent meanings. It
yields the necessary foundation for the essential categories of meaning on
which, as we shall brieﬂy show, a large number of a priori laws of meaning
rest, laws which abstract from the objective validity, from the real (real)
or formal truth, or objectivity of such meanings. These laws, which govern
the sphere of complex meanings, and whose role it is to divide sense from
nonsense, are not yet the so-called laws of logic in the pregnant sense of this
term: they provide pure logic with the possible meaning-forms, i.e. the a
priori forms of complex meanings signiﬁcant as wholes, whose ‘formal’ truth
or ‘objectivity’ then depends on these pregnantly described ‘logical laws’.
The former laws guard against senselessness (Unsinn), the latter against formal or analytic nonsense (Widersinn) or formal absurdity. If the laws of pure
logic establish what an object’s possible unity requires in virtue of its pure
form, the laws of complex meanings set forth the requirements of merely
signiﬁcant unity, i.e. the a priori patterns in which meanings belonging to
different semantic categories can be united to form one meaning, instead of
producing chaotic nonsense.
Modern grammar thinks it should build exclusively on psychology and
other empirical sciences. As against this, we see that the old idea of a universal, or even of an a priori grammar, has unquestionably acquired a foundation and a deﬁnite sphere of validity, from our pointing out that there are
a priori laws which determine the possible forms of meaning. The extent
to which there may be other discoverable ﬁelds of the grammatical a priori
goes beyond our present ﬁeld of interest. Within pure logic, there is a ﬁeld of
laws indifferent to all objectivity to which, in distinction from ‘logical laws’

184 The distinction between independent and non-independent meanings

in the usual pregnant sense, the name of ‘logico-grammatical laws’ can be
justiﬁably given. Even more aptly we can oppose the pure theory of semantic
forms to the pure theory of validity which presupposes it.

§1 Simple and complex meanings
We start from the immediately obvious division of meanings into simple
and complex, which corresponds to the grammatical distinction between
simple and complex expressions or locutions. A complex expression is an
expression, to the extent that it has one meaning; as a complex expression
it is made up of parts which are themselves expressions, and which as such
have their own meanings. If we read of ‘a man of iron’ or ‘a king who wins
the love of his subjects’ etc., we are impressed by such part-expressions or
part-meanings as those of man, iron, king, love etc.
If we now ﬁnd further part-meanings in such part-meanings, meanings
may again come forward as parts of these, but this can obviously not go on
in inﬁnitum. Continued division must ultimately lead to simple, elementary meanings. That there really are such simple meanings is shown by the
indubitable case of something. The presentative experience we have when
we understand this word is undoubtedly complex, but its meaning shows no
sign of complexity.

§4 The question of the meaningfulness of
‘syncategorematic’ components of complex
expressions
The treatment of complex meanings leads at once to a new and fundamental
division. Such meanings are, in general, only given to us as meanings of
articulate word-complexes. Regarding these one may, however, ask whether
each word in such a complex has its own correlated meaning, and whether
all verbal articulation and form counts as expressing a corresponding semantic articulation and form. According to Bolzano, ‘each word in speech
stands for its own presentation, while some stand for entire propositions’.1
He therefore, without further ado, attributes a peculiar meaning to every
conjunction or preposition. On the other hand, one frequently hears of
words and expressions that are merely ‘synsemantic’, i.e. that have no meaning by themselves, but acquire this only in conjunction with other meanings
or expressions. One distinguishes between complete and incomplete expressions of presentations, and likewise between complete and incomplete
expressions of judgements and of the phenomena of feeling and will,
and one bases on such a distinction the notion of the categorematic or syncategorematic sign. Marty applies the expression ‘categorematic sign’ (or
‘name’) to ‘all verbal means of designation, that are not merely synsemantic
(as, e.g., “the father’s”, “around”, “nonetheless” etc.) but which yet do not

Introduction 185

themselves completely express a judgement (an assertion), or a feeling or
voluntary decision etc. (requests, commands, questions etc.), but merely
express a presentation. “The founder of ethics”, “a son who has insulted
his father” are names.’2 Since Marty and other writers employ the terms
‘syncategorematic’ and ‘synsemantic’ in the same sense of signs ‘which only
have complete signiﬁcance together with other parts of speech, whether they
help to arouse concepts as mere parts of a name, or contribute to the expression of a judgement (i.e. to a statement) or to that of an emotion or act of
will (i.e. to a request or command-sentence) etc.’,3 it would have been more
consistent to interpret the notion of categorematic expression equally widely.
This notion should have been made to cover all independently signiﬁcant
or complete expressions of any intentional experience (any ‘psychic
phenomenon’ in Brentano’s sense), and a division should have been made
then between the categorematic expressions of presentations (i.e. names), the
categorematic expressions of judgements (i.e. statements) etc. Whether such
a coordination is justiﬁed, whether names, e.g., express presentations in the
same sense that request-sentences express requests, wish-sentences express
wishes etc., and likewise whether the things that names and sentences are
said to ‘express’ are themselves experiences of meaning, or how they stand
to meaning-intentions and meanings – all these are questions to which we
shall have to devote earnest thought. However this may be, the distinction
between categorematic and syncategorematic expressions, and the pleas for
its introduction, certainly have justiﬁcation, and so we are led to conceive
syncategorematic words in a manner at variance with the above-mentioned
doctrine of Bolzano. Since the distinction between categorematic and syncategorematic words is grammatical, it might seem that the situation underlying it is likewise ‘merely grammatical’. We often use several words to
express a ‘presentation’ – this, one might think, depends on chance peculiarities of one’s language. The articulation of one’s expression may bear no
relation to the articulation of meaning. The syncategorematic words which
help to build up this expression are, properly speaking, quite meaningless:
only the whole expression really has a meaning.
The grammatical distinction, however, permits another interpretation,
provided one decides to view the completeness or incompleteness of expressions as reﬂecting a certain completeness or incompleteness of meanings, the
grammatical distinction as reﬂecting a certain essential semantic distinction.4
Language has not been led by chance or caprice to express presentations by
names involving many words, but by the need to express suitably a plurality of mutually cohering part-presentations, and dependent presentational
forms, within the enclosed self-sufﬁciency of a presentational unity.5 Even a
non-independent moment, an intentional form of combination through which,
e.g., two presentations unite in a third, can ﬁnd semantic expression, it can
determine the peculiar meaning-intention of a word or complex of words.
Clearly we may say that if presentations, expressible thoughts of any sort

186 The distinction between independent and non-independent meanings

whatever, are to have their faithful reﬂections in the sphere of meaningintentions, then there must be a semantic form which corresponds to each
presentational form. This is in fact an a priori truth. And if the verbal
resources of language are to be a faithful mirror of all meanings possible
a priori, then language must have grammatical forms at its disposal which
give distinct expression, i.e. sensibly distinct symbolization, to all distinguishable meaning-forms.

§5 Independent and non-independent meanings.
The non-independence of the sensory and expressive
parts of words
This conception is plainly the only right one. We must not merely distinguish between categorematic and syncategorematic expressions but also
between categorematic and syncategorematic meanings.6 It is more signiﬁcant to speak of independent and non-independent meanings. It is of course
possible that meaning may so shift that an unarticulated meaning replaces
one that was originally articulated, so that nothing in the meaning of the
total expression now corresponds to its part-expressions. But in this case
the expression has ceased to be genuinely complex, and tends, in developed
speech, to be telescoped into one word. We no longer count its members as
syncategorematic expressions, since we do not count them as expressions
at all. We only call signiﬁcant signs expressions, and we only call expressions
complex when they are compounded out of expressions. No one would call
the word ‘king’ a complex expression since it consists of several sounds and
syllables. As opposed to this, many-worded expressions are admittedly
complex, since it is part of the notion of a word to express something;
the meaning of the word need not, however, be independent. Just as nonindependent meanings may occur only as ‘moments’ of certain independent
ones, so the linguistic expression of non-independent meanings may function
only as formal constituents in expressions of independent meanings: they
therefore become linguistically non-independent, i.e. ‘incomplete’ expressions.
Our ﬁrst purely external impression of the difference between categorematic
and syncategorematic expressions ranks the syncategorematic parts of
expressions on a level with quite different parts of expressions, with the letters, sounds and syllables which are in general meaningless. I say ‘in general’,
since there are many genuine syncategorematic expressions even among these,
such as the preﬁxes and sufﬁxes used in inﬂexion. But, in the vast majority
of cases, they are not parts of an expression qua expression, i.e. not its signiﬁcant parts; they are only parts of the expression as a sensuous phenomenon. Syncategorematic expressions are therefore understood, even when they
occur in isolation; they are felt to carry deﬁnite ‘moments’ of meaningcontent, ‘moments’ that look forward to a certain completion which, though
it may be indeterminate materially, is formally determined together with

Introduction 187

the content in question, and is circumscribed and governed by it. But where
a syncategorematic expression functions normally, and occurs in the context of an independently complete expression, it has always, as illustration
will testify, a determinate meaning-relation to our total thought; it has as its
meaning a certain non-independent part of this thought, and so makes a
deﬁnite contribution to the expression as such. That we are right becomes
clear when we consider that the same syncategorematic expression can
occur in countless compounds in which it always plays the same semantic
role. For this reason, in cases of syncategorematic ambiguity, we can reasonably consider, doubt and dispute whether the same conjunction, predicate
or relational expression has the same meaning in two contexts or not. To a
conjunction like ‘but’, or to a genitive like ‘father’s’, we can signiﬁcantly
attribute a meaning, but not to a verbal fragment like ‘fu’. Both come
before us as needing completion, but their needs of completion differ essentially: in the one case the need principally affects the thought rather than the
mere expression, in the other case it affects the expression alone or rather
the fragmentary expression. The hope is it may become an expression, a
possible spur to thought. In the successive formation of a complex verbal
structure its total meaning gradually gets built up,7 in the successive formation of a word, the word alone gets built up; only when the word is
completed does it house the ﬂeeting thought. In its own way, of course, the
verbal fragment evokes thoughts: that it is, e.g., a verbal fragment, and how
it may be completed; these are not, however, its meaning. And according as
we complete it in differing ways (fu–futile, fuming, fugitive, furry, refuge
etc.) the meaning alters, without thereby revealing an element common to
this multitude of meanings, that could be taken to be the meaning of this
common fragment. We search in vain also for a structuring of the individual
word-meaning which might in part depend upon the signiﬁcance of this
verbal fragment. It is quite meaningless.

§7 The conception of non-independent meanings as
founded contents
We have recognized that the seemingly indifferent distinction between categorematic and syncategorematic expressions corresponds to a fundamental
division in the realm of meanings. We took the former as our starting-point,
but the latter revealed itself as basic, as the prime foundation of the grammatical distinction.
The concept of the expression, or of the difference between the merely
audible, or sensuous parts of an expression and its partial expressions in the
true sense of the word, or, as we may say more pointedly, its syntactical
parts (roots, preﬁxes, sufﬁxes,8 words, conjoined complexes of words), can
only be ﬁxed by recurring to a distinction among meanings. If these divide
into simple and complex meanings, the expressions which ﬁt them must

188 The distinction between independent and non-independent meanings

also be simple or complex, and this complexity necessarily leads back to
ﬁnal signiﬁcant parts, to syntactical parts and so once more to expressions.
On the other hand, the analysis of expressions as mere sensuous phenomena
also always yields mere sensuous parts, ones that no longer signify. The
same is true of the superimposed distinction of expressions into categorematic
and syncategorematic. It can at least be described by holding the former to
be capable of serving as complete expressions, ﬁnished locutions by themselves, whereas the latter cannot. But if one wishes to limit the vagueness of
this characterization, and to pin down the sense that is here relevant, as well
as the inner ground that enables some expressions, and not others, to stand
as ﬁnished locutions, one must, as we saw, go back to the semantic realm,
and point out there the need of completion that attaches to certain nonindependent meanings.
Having called syncategorematic meanings ‘non-independent’, we have already said where we think the essence of such meanings lies. In our enquiries
into non-independent contents in general, we have given a general determination of the concept of non-independence: it is this same non-independence
that we have to recognize in the ﬁeld of meaning. Non-independent contents, are contents not able to exist alone, but only as parts of more comprehensive wholes. This inability has its a priori governing ground in the speciﬁc
essences of the contents in question. Each non-independence points to a law
to the effect that a content of the sort in question, e.g. sort A, can exist only
in the context of a whole W (AB . . . M), where B . . . M stand for determinate sorts of content. ‘Determinate’, we said, since no law merely asserts
connection between the sort A, and any other sorts whatever, that an A only
needs some completion, no matter what. Law involves speciﬁc determinateness of context: dependent and independent variables have spheres limited
by ﬁxed generic or speciﬁc characters. We have mainly employed as examples
the concrete things of sensuous intuition. We could, however, have brought
in other ﬁelds, those of act-experiences and their abstract contents.
Here we are only interested in meanings. We conceived these as ideal
unities, but our distinction naturally passed over from the real (real) to the
ideal realm. In the concrete act of meaning something, there is a moment
which corresponds to the meaning which makes up the essential character of
this act, i.e. necessarily belongs to each concrete act in which the same
meaning is ‘realized’. In regard to the division of acts into simple and complex, a concrete act can involve several acts; such partial acts can live in the
whole, whether as independent or non-independent parts. An act of meaning, in particular, can as such be complex, be made up of acts of meaning. A
total meaning then belongs to the whole act, and to each partial act a partial
meaning (a part of the meaning that is itself a meaning). A meaning, accordingly, may be called ‘independent’ when it can constitute the full, entire
meaning of a concrete act of meaning, ‘non-independent’, when this is not the
case. It can then only be realized in a non-independent part-act in a concrete
act of meaning, it can only achieve concreteness in relation to certain other

Introduction 189

complementary meanings, it can only exist in a meaningful whole. The nonindependence of meaning qua meaning thus deﬁned determines, in our view,
the essence of the syncategorematica.

§8 Difficulties of this conception. (a) Whether the
non-independence of the meaning does not really only
lie in the non-independence of the object meant
We must now consider the difﬁculties of our conception. We shall ﬁrst
discuss the relation between independence and non-independence of meanings, and independence and non-independence of objects meant. One might
for the moment think the former distinction reducible to the latter.9 Acts
which lend meaning refer as ‘presentations’, as ‘intentional’ experiences, to
objects. If some constituent of an object is non-independent, it cannot be
‘presented’ in isolation; the corresponding meaning therefore demands a
completion, it is itself non-independent. The seemingly obvious principle
emerges: categorematic expressions are directed to independent objects,
syncategorematic expressions to non-independent ones.
Such a conception is readily seen to be erroneous. The very expression
non-independent moment provides a decisive counter-example. It is a
categorematic expression and yet presents a non-independent object. Every
non-independent object whatever can be made the object of an independent
meaning, and that directly, e.g. Redness, Figure, Likeness, Size, Unity, Being.
These examples show that independent meanings correspond, not merely to
material moments of objects, but also to their categorial forms, meanings
peculiarly directed to these forms and making them their objects: the latter
are not for that reason self-existent in the sense of being independent. The
possibility of independent meanings directed to non-independent ‘moments’
is not at all remarkable, when we reﬂect on the fact that a meaning ‘presents’
an object, but does not therefore have the character of picturing it, that
its essence consists rather in a certain intention, which can be intentionally
‘directed’ to anything and everything, to what is independent as much as
what is non-independent. Anything, everything can be objectiﬁed as a thing
meant, i.e. can become an intentional object.

§10 A priori laws governing combinations of meanings
If we relate the distinction between independent and non-independent
meanings to the more general distinction between independent and nonindependent objects, we are really covering one of the most fundamental facts
in the realm of meaning: that meanings are subject to a priori laws regulating
their combination into new meanings. To each case of non-independent meaning, a law of essence applies – following the principle discussed by us in relation to all non-independent objects whatever – a law regulating the meaning’s
need of completion by further meanings, and so pointing to the forms and

190 The distinction between independent and non-independent meanings

kinds of context into which it must be ﬁtted. Since meanings cannot be
combined to form new meanings without the aid of connective forms, which
are themselves meanings of a non-independent sort, there are obviously a
priori laws of essence governing all meaning-combinations. The important
fact here before us is not peculiar to the realm of meaning: it plays its part
wherever combination occurs. All combinations whatever are subject to
pure laws; this holds particularly of all material combinations limited to a
single sphere of fact, where the results of combination must occupy the
same sphere as the combining members. (This case is opposed to that of
formal, ‘analytic’ combinations, e.g. collections, which are not bound up
with the peculiarities of a sphere of fact, nor with the factual essence of their
combining members.) In no sphere is it possible to combine items of any and
every kind by way of any and every form: the sphere of items sets a priori
limits to the number of combinatorial forms, and prescribes the general
laws for ﬁlling them in. That this fact is general should not lessen our
obligation to point out such general laws in each given ﬁeld, and to pursue
their unfolding into special laws.
As regards the ﬁeld of meaning, the briefest consideration will show up
our unfreedom in binding meanings to meanings, so that we cannot juggle
at will with the elements of a signiﬁcantly given, connected unity. Meanings
only ﬁt together in antecedently deﬁnite ways, composing other signiﬁcantly
uniﬁed meanings, while other possibilities of combination are excluded by
laws, and yield only a heap of meanings, never a single meaning. The impossibility of their combination rests on a law of essence, and is by no means
merely subjective. It is not our mere factual incapacity, the compulsion of
our ‘mental make-up’, which puts it beyond us to realize such a unity. In the
cases we here have in mind, the impossibility is rather objective, ideal, rooted
in the pure essence of the meaning-realm, to be grasped, therefore, with
apodictic self-evidence. The impossibility attaches, to be more precise, not
to what is singular in the meanings to be combined, but to the essential
kinds, the semantic categories, that they fall under. This or that meaning is,
of course, itself a species, but, relative to a meaning-category, it only counts
as an individual speciﬁcation. In arithmetic, likewise, relatively to numerical
forms and laws a numerically deﬁnite number is an individual speciﬁcation.
Wherever, therefore, we see the impossibility of combining given meanings,
this impossibility points to an unconditionally general law to the effect that
meanings belonging to corresponding meaning-categories, and conforming
to the same pure forms, should lack a uniﬁed result. We have, in short, an
a priori impossibility.
What we have just said holds of course of the possibility of signiﬁcant
combinations as it holds of their impossibility.
To consider an example. The expression ‘This tree is green’ has uniﬁed
meaning. If we formalize this meaning (the independent logical proposition)
and proceed to the corresponding pure form of meaning, we obtain ‘This

Introduction 191

S is P’, an ideal form whose range of values consists solely of independent (propositional) meanings. It is now plain that what we may call the
‘materialization’ of this form, its speciﬁcation in deﬁnite propositions, is
possible in inﬁnitely many ways, but that we are not completely free in such
speciﬁcation, but work conﬁned within deﬁnite limits. We cannot substitute
any meanings we like for the variables ‘S’ and ‘P’. Within the framework of
our form we can change our example ‘This tree is green’ into ‘This gold . . .’,
‘This algebraic number . . .’, ‘This blue raven etc., is green’: any nominal
material – in a wide sense of ‘nominal material’ – can here be inserted, and
so plainly can any adjectival material replace the ‘P’. In each case we have
once more a meaning uniﬁed in sense, i.e. an independent proposition of
the prescribed form, but if we depart from the categories of our meaningmaterial, the unitary sense vanishes. Where nominal material stands, any
nominal material can stand, but not adjectival, nor relational, nor completed propositional material. But where we have materials from such other
categories, other material of the same kind can be put, i.e. always material
from the same category and not from another. This holds of all meanings
whatsoever, whatever the complexity of their form.
In such free exchange of materials within each category, false, foolish,
ridiculous meanings – complete propositions or elements of propositions –
may result, but such results will necessarily be uniﬁed meanings, or grammatical expressions whose sense can be unitarily realized. When we transgress
the bounds of categories, this is no longer true. We can string together
words like ‘This careless is green’, ‘More intense is round’, ‘This house is
just like’; we may substitute ‘horse’ for ‘resembles’ in a relational statement
of the form ‘a resembles b’, but we achieve only a word-series, in which each
word is as such signiﬁcant, or points to a complete, signiﬁcant context, but
we do not, in principle, achieve a closed unity of sense. This is above all the
case when we seek arbitrarily to exchange parts which are themselves formed
units within an articulated unit of meaning, or when we replace such parts
by others taken at random from other meanings, as, e.g., when we try to
replace the antecedent in a hypothetical proposition (a mere element in
the total unity that we call ‘the hypothetical proposition’) by a nominal element, or one of the members of a disjunction by a hypothetical consequent.
Instead of doing this in the concrete, we may also attempt it in the corresponding pure forms of meaning, i.e. propositional forms. We are at once
made aware, through a priori insight into law, that such intended combinations are ruled out by the very nature of the constituents of the pure patterns
in question, that such constituents can only enter into deﬁnitely constituted
meaning-patterns.
It is plain, ﬁnally, that the pure elements of form in a concrete unity of
meaning can never change places with the elements to which they give form,
and which also give our meaning its relation to things. The speciﬁcation of
uniﬁed meaning-forms such as ‘An S is p’, ‘If S is p, Q is r’ etc., cannot, in

192 The distinction between independent and non-independent meanings

principle, so proceed that abstracted elements of form take the place of the
‘terms’, i.e. the materials in the meaning-pattern which relate to things. We
can construct verbal strings such as ‘if the or is green’, ‘A tree is and’ etc.,
but such strings have no graspable single meanings. It is an analytic truth
that the forms in a whole cannot function as its materials, nor vice-versa,
and this obviously carries over into the sphere of meanings.
In general we recognize, as we construct and think over such examples,
that every concrete meaning represents a ﬁtting together of materials and
forms, that each such meaning falls under an ideal pattern that can be set
forth in formal purity, and that to each such pattern an a priori law of
meaning corresponds. This law governs the formation of unitary meanings
out of syntactical materials falling under deﬁnite categories having an a
priori place in the realm of meanings, a formation according to syntactical
forms which are likewise ﬁxed a priori, and which can be readily seen to
constitute a ﬁxed system of forms. Hence arises the great task equally
fundamental for logic and for grammar, of setting forth the a priori constitution of the realm of meanings, of investigating the a priori system of
the formal structures which leave open all material speciﬁcity of meaning, in
a ‘theory of the forms’.

§12 Nonsense and absurdity
One must, of course, distinguish the law-governed incompatibilities to
which the study of syncategorematica has introduced us, from the other
incompatibilities illustrated by the example of ‘a round square’. As said in
our First Investigation,10 one must not confound the senseless (or nonsensical) with the absurd (or ‘counter-sensical’), though we tend to exaggerate
and call the latter ‘senseless’, when it is rather a sub-species of the significant. The combination ‘a round square’ really yields a uniﬁed meaning,
having its mode of ‘existence’ or being in the realm of ideal meanings, but it
is apodictically evident that no existent object can correspond to such an
existent meaning. But if we say ‘a round or’, ‘a man and is’ etc., there exist
no meanings which correspond to such verbal combinations as their expressed sense. The coordinated words give us the indirect idea of some
unitary meaning they express, but it is apodictically clear that no such meaning can exist, that signiﬁcant parts of these sorts, thus combined, cannot
consist with each other in a uniﬁed meaning. This indirect notion would not
itself be accepted as the meaning of such verbal complexes. When an expression functions normally, it evokes its meaning: when understanding fails,
its sensuous similarity to understood, meaningful speech will evoke the
inauthentic notion of a ‘certain’ pertinent meaning, since the meaning itself
is what is precisely missing.
The difference between the two incompatibilities is plain. In the one case
certain partial meanings fail to assort together in a unity of meaning as far

Introduction 193

as the objectivity or truth of the total meaning is concerned. An object (e.g.
a thing, state of affairs) which unites all that the uniﬁed meaning conceives
as pertaining to it by way of its ‘incompatible’ meanings, neither exists nor
can exist, though the meaning itself exists. Names such as ‘wooden iron’ and
‘round square’ or sentences such as ‘All squares have ﬁve angles’ are names
or sentences as genuine as any. In the other case the possibility of a unitary
meaning itself excludes the possible coexistence of certain partial meanings
in itself. We have then only an indirect idea, directed upon the synthesis
of such partial meanings in a single meaning, and at the same time see that
no object can ever correspond to such an idea, i.e. that a meaning of the
intended sort cannot exist. The judgement of incompatibility is in one case
connected with presentations, in another with objects; presentations of presentations enter the former unity of judgement, whereas plain presentations
enter the latter.
The grammatical expression of the a priori incompatibilities and
compatibilities here in question, as of the pertinent laws governing
meaning-combinations, must in part be found in the grammatical rules
governing the parts of speech. If we ask why our language allows certain
verbal combinations and disallows others, we are to a large extent referred
to contingent linguistic habits, to matters of mere fact concerning language,
which develop in one way in one speech-community and another way in
another. In part, however, we encounter the essential difference of independent and non-independent meanings and, closely involved therewith,
the a priori laws of the combination and transformation of meanings, laws
which must be more or less revealed in every developed language, both in its
grammar of forms and in the related class of grammatical incompatibilities.

§13 The laws of the compounding of meanings and
the pure logico-grammatical theory of forms
The task of an accomplished science of meanings would be to investigate
the law-governed, essence-bound structure of meanings and the laws of combination and modiﬁcation of meaning which depend upon these, also to
reduce such laws to the least number of independent elementary laws. We
should obviously also need to track down the primitive meaning-patterns
and their inner structures, and, in connection with these, to ﬁx the pure
categories of meaning which circumscribe the sense and range of the
indeterminates – the ‘variables’ in a sense quite close to that of mathematics
– that occur in such laws. What formal laws of combination may achieve,
can be made fairly plain by arithmetic. There are deﬁnite forms of synthesis,
through which, quite in general or in certain deﬁnite conditions, two numbers give rise to new numbers. The ‘direct operations’ a + b, ab, a b yield
resultant numbers unrestrictedly, the ‘inverse operations, a − b, a/b,
b√a, b loga, only in certain conditions. That this is the case must be laid

194 The distinction between independent and non-independent meanings

down by an assertion or rather a law of existence, and perhaps proved from
certain primitive axioms. The little we have so far been able to indicate
has made plain that there are similar laws governing the existence or nonexistence of meanings in the semantic sphere, and that in these laws meanings
are not free variables, but are bound down to the range of varying categories,
all arising out of the nature of the sphere in question.
In the pure logic of meanings, whose higher aim is the laws of objective
validity for meanings (to the extent that such validity depends purely on
semantic form), the theory of the essential meaning-structures, and the laws
of their formal constitution, provide the needed foundation. Traditional
logic, with its theories of concepts and judgements, offers us a few isolated
starting-points, without being clear as to the end to be aimed at, either in
general or in respect of the pure Idea of meaning. Plainly the theory of the
elementary structures and the concrete patterns of ‘judgement’ – here understood as ‘propositions’ – will comprise the whole form-theory of meanings,
each concrete meaning-pattern being either a proposition or a possible element
in propositions. We must note that the exclusion of the ‘material of knowledge’, to which pure logic is by its very sense committed, obliges us to keep
out everything which could give semantic forms (types, patterns) a deﬁnite
relation to factual spheres of being. Everywhere indeﬁnitely general presentations of factual material, deﬁnitely determined only in respect of semantic
category, e.g. nominal, adjectival, propositional etc., must do duty for contentful concepts and even for the highest of such concepts, e.g. physical thing,
spatial thing, mental thing etc.
Our ﬁrst task, therefore, in a purely logical form-theory of meanings, is to
lay down the primitive forms of meaning with the requisite purity just described. We must ﬁx the primitive forms of independent meanings, of complete
propositions with their internal articulations, and the structures contained in
such articulations. We must ﬁx, too, the primitive forms of compounding and
modiﬁcation permitted by the essence of different categories of possible
elements. (We must note that complete propositions can become members
of other propositions.) After this, we must systematically survey a boundless
multitude of further forms, all derivable by way of repeated compounding
or modiﬁcation.
The forms to be established are naturally ‘valid’, which here means that,
however speciﬁed, they will yield real meanings, meanings real as meanings.
To each such primitive form there belongs, therefore, an a priori law of
existence, to the effect that each meaning-combination conforming to such
a form genuinely yields a uniﬁed meaning, provided only that its terms, the
Form’s indeterminates or variables, belong to certain semantic categories.
The deduction of derived forms must also pro tanto be a deduction of their
validity, and laws of existence will, therefore, also relate to these, but they
will be deduced from those relating to the primitive forms. Any two propositions yield, when combined in the form M and N, another proposition, any

Introduction 195

two adjectives another adjective (again one meaning that can stand as a
complex but unitary attribute or predicate). To any two propositions, M,
N, there belong, likewise, the primitive connective forms If M then N, M or
N, so that the result again is a proposition. To any nominal meaning S,
and any adjectival meaning p, there belongs the primitive form Sp (e.g. red
house), the result being a new meaning ﬁxed by law in the category of
nominal meaning. We could in this manner give many other examples of
primitive connective forms. We must remember, in stating all the laws that
hold here, and in conceiving categorial Ideas of proposition, nominal presentation, adjectival presentation, which determine the variables of the laws,
to abstract from the changing syntactical forms that such meanings have
in given cases, and that they have to have in some determinate form. We
speak of the same name, whether it occupies the subject-position or serves
as a correlated object, of the same adjective, whether used predicatively or
attributively, of the same proposition, whether used as a free unit or as a
conjunctive, disjunctive, or hypothetical antecedent or consequent, or whether
occupying this or that place as a member in a complex propositional unity.
We thus ﬁx plainly the much used, but never scientiﬁcally clariﬁed, talk
about terms in traditional logic. In the formal laws which enter the purview
of this logic,11 as in our own laws of structures, such ‘terms’ function as
variables; the categories circumscribing the range of their variability are
categories of terms. The scientiﬁc pinning down of these categories is plainly
one of the ﬁrst tasks of our doctrine of forms.
If we now make gradual substitutions in the primitive forms set forth, and
for a simple term repeatedly substitute a combination exemplifying the same
forms, and if we always reapply our primitive existential law, we arrive at
ever new forms, of deductively proven validity, encapsulated in one another
with any degree of complexity. Thus for the conjunctive combination of propositions one can substitute:
(M and N) and P
(M and N) and (P and Q)
{(M and N) and P} and Q
etc., etc., and so for the disjunctive and hypothetical combination of propositions, and for other modes of combinations in any other semantic
categories. We see at once that the compoundings go on in inﬁnitum, in a
manner permitting comprehensive oversight, that each new form remains
tied to the same semantic category, the same ﬁeld of variability as its terms,
and that, as long as we stay in this ﬁeld, all framable combinations of
meanings necessarily exist, i.e. must represent a uniﬁed sense. We see also
that the relevant existential propositions are obvious deductive consequences
of an existential proposition with the primitive form. Instead of constantly
reapplying the same mode of combination, we can plainly vary our procedure at will, and combine different forms of combination in our construction,

196 The distinction between independent and non-independent meanings

always within legally allowed limits, and so conceive an inﬁnity of complex
forms legally engendered. As we formulate these facts in consciousness, we
gain insight into the a priori constitution of the meaning-realm in respect of
all those forms which have their a priori origin in its basic forms.
This insight, and the ﬁnal comprehensive insight into the formal constitution of the whole semantic realm, is, of course, the one aim of such investigations. It would be stupid to hope for worthwhile rules for the compounding
of meanings (or rules for the grammatical compounding of expressions)
from the formulation of semantic types, and the existential laws relating to
them. There is no temptation here to depart from the line of correctness,
hence no practical interest in determining it scientiﬁcally. Nonsense stands
so immediately revealed, with each deviation from normal forms, that we
hardly fall into such deviations in the practice of thought and speech. The
theoretical interest of the systematic investigation of all possible meaningforms and primitive structures, is all the greater. We, in fact, rise to the
insight that all possible meanings are subject to a ﬁxed typic of categorial
structures built, in a priori fashion, into the general Idea of meaning, that
a priori laws govern the realm of meaning, whereby all possible concrete
meaning-patterns systematically depend on a small number of primitive forms,
ﬁxed by laws of existence, out of which they ﬂow by pure construction. This
last generalization, through its a priori, purely categorial character, brings to
scientiﬁc awareness a basic chapter in the constitution of ‘theoretical reason’.
Additional note. I talked above of compounding and modiﬁcation. The
rules of modiﬁcation also have a place in the sphere we must deﬁne. What
we mean is shown by the analogue of suppositio materialis considered above.
Other instances are differences of contextual functioning, of a priori syntactical position, as when a name functioning as subject shifts to the objectplace. These differences are not easy to elucidate: they are mixed up with
empirical factors, and terminate in case-forms and syntactical forms of
grammar. The difference between the attributive and predicative functioning
of adjectival meanings, as well as similar matters, have here their place.
(The investigations of the form-doctrine of meanings announced in our First
Edition, and since expounded with many improvements in my lectures
at Göttingen since 1901, will shortly, I hope, be laid before a wider public in
my Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung.)

Investigation V

On intentional
experiences and
their ‘contents’

Hh

Introduction

In our Second Investigation we clariﬁed the general sense of the ideality of
the Species and, together with it, the sense of the ideality of meanings with
which pure logic is concerned. As with all ideal unities, there are here real
possibilities, and perhaps actualities, which correspond to meanings: to meanings in specie correspond acts of meaning, the former being nothing but
ideally apprehended aspects of the latter. New questions now arise regarding the kind of experiences in which the supreme genus Meaning has its
originative source, and likewise regarding the various sorts of experiences in
which essentially different sorts of meaning unfold. We wish to enquire into
the originative source of the concept of Meaning and its essential speciﬁcations, so as to achieve a deeper-going, more widely ranging answer to our
question than our investigations have so far given us. In very close connection with this question, certain other questions arise: meanings have to be
present in meaning-intentions that can come into a certain relation to intuition. We have often spoken of the fulﬁlment of a meaning-intention through
a corresponding intuition, and have said that the highest form of such fulﬁlment was that of self-evidence. It is therefore our task to describe this
remarkable phenomenological relationship, and to lay down its role, and so
to clarify the notions of knowledge which presuppose it. For an analytical
investigation these tasks are not really separable from our earlier work on
the essence of meaning (particularly as this last relates to the logical presentation and the logical judgement).
The present investigation will not yet embark on these tasks, since we
cannot enter upon them without ﬁrst performing a much more general
phenomenological investigation. Experiences of meaning are classiﬁable
as ‘acts’, and the meaningful element in each such single act must be sought
in the act-experience, and not in its object; it must lie in that element which
makes the act an ‘intentional’ experience, one ‘directed’ to objects. The
essence of the fulﬁlling intuition likewise consists in acts, for thinking and
intuiting must be different qua acts. Naturally, too, self-fulﬁlment must be
reckoned a relation especially bound up with the characters of acts. No term
in descriptive psychology is, however, more controversial than the term

200 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

‘act’, and doubt, if not quick rejection, may have been aroused by all passages in our previous Investigations where we made use of the notion of
‘act’ to characterize or express our conception. It is therefore important,
and a precondition for carrying out all our tasks, that this concept should
be clariﬁed before all others. It will appear that the concept of act, in the
sense of an intentional experience, circumscribes an important generic unity
in the sphere of experiences (apprehended in its phenomenological purity),
and that to put meaning-experiences into this genus enables us to characterize them in a truly worthwhile manner.
It is of course part of phenomenological research into the essence of acts
as such, that we should clear up the difference between the character and
the content of acts, and that, as regards the latter, we should point out the
fundamentally different senses in which the ‘content’ of an act has been
talked about.
The nature of acts as such cannot be satisfactorily discussed unless one
goes fairly fully into the phenomenology of ‘presentations’. The intimate
relevance of this topic is recalled by the well-known statement, that every
act is either a presentation or is founded upon presentations. We must,
however, ask which of the very many concepts of ‘presentation’ is here the
required one: to separate the closely confused phenomena underlying the
ambiguities of this word thus becomes an essential part of our task.
The treatment of the problems thus roughly outlined (to which certain
others will be intimately linked) is suitably connected by us with the many
concepts of consciousness which are always being distinguished, and are
always shading into one another in descriptive psychology. Mental acts are
often called ‘activities of consciousness’, ‘relations of consciousness to a
content (object)’, and ‘consciousness’ is, in fact, at times deﬁned as a comprehensive expression covering mental acts of all sorts.

as the phenomenological subsistence of the ego
Chapter Consciousness
1

201

Consciousness as the
phenomenological subsistence of
the ego and consciousness as
inner perception

§1 Varied ambiguity of the term ‘consciousness’
In psychology there is much talk of ‘consciousness’, and likewise of ‘conscious
contents’ and ‘conscious experiences’: the latter are generally abbreviated to
‘contents’ and ‘experiences’. This talk is mainly connected with the division
between psychical and physical phenomena; the former being those phenomena which belong to the sphere of psychology, the latter to the sphere of the
natural sciences. Our problem, that of circumscribing the concept of ‘mental
act’ in its phenomenological essence, is closely connected with this problem
of division, since the concept arose precisely in this context, as supposedly
marking off the psychological sphere. One concept of consciousness is justiﬁably employed in effecting this demarcation correctly, another yields us the
deﬁnition of a mental act. We must, in either case, distinguish between
several thematically cognate, and so readily confounded, notions.
We shall, in what follows, discuss three concepts of consciousness, as
having interest for our purposes:
1. Consciousness as the entire, real (reelle) phenomenological being of the
empirical ego, as the interweaving of psychic experiences in the uniﬁed
stream of consciousness.
2. Consciousness as the inner awareness of one’s own psychic experiences.
3. Consciousness as a comprehensive designation for ‘mental acts’, or ‘intentional experiences’, of all sorts.
It need hardly be said that we have not exhausted all ambiguities of
the term in question. I particularly recall, e.g., modes of speech current in
non-scientiﬁc parlance such as ‘entering consciousness’, ‘coming to consciousness’, ‘heightened’ or ‘reduced’ self-consciousness, the ‘awakening of
self-consciousness’ (the last expression quite differently used in psychology
from the sense given it in ordinary life), and so forth.
Since all terms at all relevant for terminological differentiation are
ambiguous, an unambiguous ﬁxing of the concepts which here distinguish

202 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

themselves can only be done indirectly: we must put together equivalent
expressions, and oppose them to expressions to be kept apart from them, and
we must employ suitable paraphrases and explanations. We shall therefore
have to make use of these aids.

§2 First sense: Consciousness as the real
phenomenological unity of the ego’s experiences.
The concept of an experience
We begin with the following summary statement. The modern psychologist
deﬁnes (or could deﬁne) his science as the science of ‘psychic individuals’
considered as concrete conscious unities, or as the science of the conscious
experiences of experiencing individuals; the juxtaposition of these terms in
this context determines a certain concept of consciousness and, at the same
time, certain concepts of experience and content. These latter terms, ‘experience’ and ‘content’, mean for the modern psychologist the real occurrences
(Wundt rightly calls them ‘events’) which, in ﬂux from one moment to the
next, and interconnected and interpenetrating in manifold ways, compose
the real unity-of-consciousness of the individual mind. In this sense, percepts, imaginative and pictorial presentations, acts of conceptual thinking,
surmises and doubts, joys and griefs, hopes and fears, wishes and acts of will
etc., are, just as they ﬂourish in our consciousness, ‘experiences’ or ‘contents
of consciousness’. And, with these experiences in their total and concrete
fulness, their component parts and abstract aspects are also experienced:
they are real contents of consciousness. Naturally, it is irrelevant whether
these parts are in some manner inwardly articulated, whether they are marked
off by special acts directed upon themselves, and whether, in particular, they
are themselves objects of an ‘inner’ perception, which seizes them as they are
in consciousness, and even whether they can be such objects or not.
We may now point out that this concept of consciousness can be seen in a
purely phenomenological manner, i.e. a manner which cuts out all relation to
empirically real existence (to persons or animals in nature): experience in
the descriptive-psychological or empirically-phenomenological sense then
becomes experience in the sense of pure phenomenology.1 The clarifying
illustrations that we now append may and must lead to the conviction that
the required exclusion lies always in our power, and that the descriptivepsychological treatments that we have ﬁrst applied or might ﬁrst apply to
such illustrations, are to be interpreted ‘purely’ in the manner sketched
above, and to be understood in what follows as pure, a priori insights into
essence. The same, of course, holds in all parallel cases.
The sensational moment of colour, e.g., which in outer perception forms
a real constituent of my concrete seeing (in the phenomenological sense of a
visual perceiving or appearing) is as much an ‘experienced’ or ‘conscious’

Consciousness as the phenomenological subsistence of the ego 203

content, as is the character of perceiving, or as the full perceptual appearing
of the coloured object. As opposed to this, however, this object, though
perceived, is not itself experienced nor conscious, and the same applies to
the colouring perceived in it. If the object is non-existent, if the percept is
open to criticism as delusive, hallucinatory, illusory etc., then the visually
perceived colour, that of the object, does not exist either. Such differences of
normal and abnormal, of veridical and delusive perception, do not affect the
internal, purely descriptive (or phenomenological) character of perception.
While the seen colour, i.e. the colour appearing upon and with the appearing object of visual perception, and seen as its property, and one with it in
its present being – while this colour certainly does not exist as an experience,
there is a real part (reelles Bestandstück) of our experience, of this appearing
to perception, which corresponds to it. Our colour-sensation corresponds to
it, that qualitatively determinate phenomenological colour-aspect, which receives an ‘objectifying interpretation’ in perception, or in an intrinsic aspect
of such perception (the ‘appearance of the object’s colouring’). These two,
the colour-sensation and the object’s objective colouring, are often confounded. In our time people have favoured a form of words according to
which both are the same thing, only seen from a different standpoint, or with
a different interest: psychologically or subjectively speaking, one has a sensation, physically or objectively speaking, one has a property of an external
thing. Here it is enough to point to the readily grasped difference between
the red of this ball, objectively seen as uniform, and the indubitable, unavoidable projective differences among the subjective colour-sensations in our
percept, a difference repeated in all sorts of objective properties and the
sensational complexes which correspond to them.
What we have said about single properties carries over to concrete wholes.
It is phenomenologically false to say that the difference between a conscious
content in perception, and the external object perceived (or perceptually
intended) in it, is a mere difference in mode of treatment, the same appearance being at one time dealt with in a subjective connection (in connection
with appearances which relate to an ego), and at another time in an objective connection (in connection with the things themselves). We cannot too
sharply stress the equivocation which allows us to use the word ‘appearance’
both of the experience in which the object’s appearing consists (the concrete
perceptual experience, in which the object itself seems present to us) and of
the object which appears as such. The deceptive spell of this equivocation
vanishes as soon as one takes phenomenological account as to how little
of the object which appears is as such to be found in the experience of its
appearing. The appearing of the thing (the experience) is not the thing
which appears (that seems to stand before us in propria persona). As belonging in a conscious connection, the appearing of things is experienced by us,
as belonging in the phenomenal world, things appear before us. The appearing of the things does not itself appear to us, we live through it.

204 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

If we ourselves appear to ourselves as members of the phenomenal world,2
physical and mental things (bodies and persons) appear in physical and
mental relation to our phenomenal ego. This relation of the phenomenal
object (that we also like to call a ‘conscious content’) to the phenomenal subject (myself as an empirical person, a thing) must naturally be kept apart from
the relation of a conscious content, in the sense of an experience, to consciousness in the sense of a unity of such conscious contents (the phenomenological
subsistence of an empirical ego). There we were concerned with the relation
of two appearing things, here with the relation of a single experience to a
complex of experiences. Just so, conversely, we must of course distinguish
the relation of the appearing person I to the externally appearing thing,
from the relation of the thing’s appearing (‘qua’ experience) to the thing which
appears. If we speak of the latter relation, we only make clear to ourselves
that the experience is not itself what is intentionally present ‘in’ it: we can,
e.g., make plain that what is predicated of a thing’s appearing is not also
predicated of the thing that appears in it. And yet another relation is the
objectifying relation ascribed by us to the sense-complex experienced by us
when something appears to us, a relation in which the complex stands to the
object which appears to us. We concede that such a complex is experienced in
the act of appearing, but say that it is in a certain manner ‘interpreted’ or
‘apperceived’, and hold that it is in the phenomenological character of such
an animating interpretation of sensation that what we call the appearing of
the object consists.3
Similar distinctions of essence to those needed by us in the case of perception, when we sought to separate off what is really ‘experience’ in it and
really composes it, from what is only ‘in’ it in an ‘improper’ or intentional
sense, will have soon to be drawn in the case of other ‘acts’ as well. We shall
soon have to deal with such distinctions more generally. Here it is only important to guard from the start against certain misleading thought-tendencies,
which might obscure the plain sense of the notions to be elucidated.

§4 The relation between experiencing consciousness
and experienced content is no phenomenologically
peculiar type of relation
The foregoing exposition has made clear that the relation in which experiences are thought to stand to an experiencing consciousness (or to an experiencing ‘phenomenological ego’)4 points to no peculiar phenomenological
situation. The ego in the sense of common discourse is an empirical object,
one’s own ego as much as someone else’s, and each ego as much as any
physical thing, a house or a tree etc. Scientiﬁc elaboration may alter our
ego-concept as much as it will, but, if it avoids ﬁction, the ego remains an
individual, thinglike object, which, like all such objects, has phenomenally
no other unity than that given it through its uniﬁed phenomenal properties,

Consciousness as the phenomenological subsistence of the ego 205

and which in them has its own internal make-up. If we cut out the ego-body
from the empirical ego, and limit the purely mental ego to its phenomenological content, the latter reduces to a unity of consciousness, to a real
experiential complex, which we (i.e. each man for his own ego) ﬁnd in
part evidently present, and for the rest postulate on good grounds. The
phenomenologically reduced ego is therefore nothing peculiar, ﬂoating
above many experiences: it is simply identical with their own interconnected
unity. In the nature of its contents, and the laws they obey, certain forms
of connection are grounded. They run in diverse fashions from content to
content, from complex of contents to complex of contents, till in the end a
uniﬁed sum total of content is constituted, which does not differ from the
phenomenologically reduced ego itself. These contents have, as contents
generally have, their own law-bound ways of coming together, of losing themselves in more comprehensive unities and, in so far as they thus become
and are one, the phenomenological ego or unity of consciousness is already
constituted, without need of an additional, peculiar ego-principle which
supports all contents and unites them all once again. Here as elsewhere it is
not clear what such a principle would effect.5

§5 Second sense. ‘Inner’ consciousness as inner
perception
Our sense of the terms ‘consciousness’, ‘experience’, ‘content’, has been ﬁxed
in the treatments of the last three sections, a descriptive-psychological sense
which, with phenomenological ‘puriﬁcation’, becomes purely phenomenological.
We wish to adhere to this sense in future, but only when other concepts
have been expressly indicated.
A second concept of consciousness is expressed by talk of ‘inner consciousness’. This is that ‘inner perception’ thought to accompany actually
present experiences, whether in general, or in certain classes of cases, and to
relate to them as its objects. The ‘self-evidence’ usually attributed to inner
perception, shows it to be taken to be an adequate perception, one ascribing
nothing to its objects that is not intuitively presented, and given as a real
part (reell) of the perceptual experience, and one which, conversely, intuitively presents and posits its objects just as they are in fact experienced in
and with their perception. Every perception is characterized by the intention
of grasping its object as present, and in propria persona. To this intention
perception corresponds with complete perfection, achieves adequacy, if the
object in it is itself actually present, and in the strictest sense present in
propria persona, is exhaustively apprehended as that which it is, and is therefore itself a real (reell) factor in our perceiving of it. It is accordingly clear,
and evident from the mere essence of perception, that adequate perception
can only be ‘inner’ perception, that it can only be trained upon experiences
simultaneously given, and belonging to a single experience with itself. This

206 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

holds, precisely stated, only for experiences in the purely phenomenological
sense. One cannot, however, at all concur with the converse opinion and
say, in psychological language, that each percept directed upon one’s own
inner experience (which would be called an ‘inner’ percept in the natural
sense of the word) need be adequate. In view of the just exposed ambiguity
of the expression ‘inner perception’, it would be best to have different terms
for inner perception, as the perception of one’s own experiences, and adequate or evident perception. The epistemologically confused and psychologically misused distinction of inner and outer perception would then vanish;
it has been put in the place of the genuine contrast between adequate and
inadequate perception which has its roots in the pure phenomenological
essences of such experiences. [On this point, see the Appendix on internal
and external perceptions.]
Many thinkers, as, e.g., Brentano, are led to posit a close connection between
the two concepts of consciousness so far discussed, because they think that
they may regard the consciousness, or the being-experienced, of contents, in
the ﬁrst sense, as at the same time a consciousness in the second sense. The
equivocation which pushes us to treat consciousness as a sort of knowing,
and in fact of intuitive knowing, may here have recommended a conception
fraught with too many grave difﬁculties. I recall the inﬁnite regress which
sprung from the circumstance that inner perception is itself another experience, which requires a new percept, to which the same again applies etc., a
regress which Brentano sought to avoid by distinguishing between a primary
and a secondary direction of perception. Since our concern is here with
purely phenomenological asseverations, we must leave theories of this sort
on one side, so long, that is, as the need to assume the unbroken activity of
inner perception cannot be phenomenologically demonstrated.

§6 Origin of the first concept of consciousness
out of the second
Undeniably the second concept of consciousness is the more ‘primitive’: it
has an ‘intrinsic priority’. The following considerations would enable us to
pass in scientiﬁc order from this last narrower concept to our former, broader
one. If we consider the self-evidence of the Cogito, ergo sum, or rather of its
simple sum, as one that can be sustained against all doubts, then it is plain
that what here passes as ego cannot be the empirical ego. But since, on the
other hand, we cannot allow the self-evidence of the proposition ‘I am’ to
depend on the knowledge and acceptance of philosophical ideas about
the ego which have always remained questionable, we can at best say: In
the judgement ‘I am’ self-evidence attaches to a certain central kernel of
our empirical ego-notion which is not bounded by a perfectly clear concept.
If we now ask what could belong to this conceptually undemarcated and
therefore unutterable kernel, what may constitute the self-evidently certain,

Consciousness as the phenomenological subsistence of the ego 207

given element in the empirical ego at each moment, it comes easy to refer to
judgements of inner (i.e. adequate) perception. Not only is it self-evident
that I am: self-evidence also attaches to countless judgements of the form I
perceive this or that, where I not merely think, but am also self-evidently
assured, that what I perceive is given as I think of it, that I apprehend the
thing itself, and for what it is – this pleasure, e.g., that ﬁlls me, this phantasm of the mind that ﬂoat before me etc. All these judgements share the lot
of the judgement ‘I am’, they elude complete conceptualization and expression, they are evident only in their living intention, which cannot be adequately imparted in words. What is adequately perceived, whether expressed
thus vaguely or left unexpressed, constitutes the epistemologically primary,
absolutely certain focus yielded by the reduction, at any given moment, of
the phenomenal empirical ego to such of its content as can be grasped by
the pure phenomenologist. It is also true, conversely, that in the judgement
‘I am’, it is the kernel of what is adequately perceived which, ranged under
the ego, ﬁrst makes possible and provides a ground for this ‘I am’s’ evidence.6 To this primary focus more territory is added when we reduce to its
past phenomenological content all that retention, essentially attached to
perception, reports as having been recently present, and also all that recollection reports as having belonged to our earlier actual experience, and
when we then go back through reﬂection to what ‘in’ retention and remembrance is reproductively phenomenological. We proceed similarly with what
can be assumed on empirical grounds to coexist with what at each instant
we adequately perceive, or with what can be assumed to have coexisted with
what now forms the reﬂective substance of retention and recollection, and
can be assumed to have cohered continuously with it in unity. When I say
‘cohered continuously with it in unity’, I refer to the unity of the concrete
phenomenological whole, whose parts are either abstract aspects, mutually
founded upon, and requiring each other in their coexistence, or pieces from
whose nature spring forms of coexistent unity, forms which actually contribute to the content of the whole as real indwelling aspects. These ‘unities
of coexistence’ pass continuously into one another from one moment to the
next, composing a unity of change, of the stream of consciousness, which in
its turn demands the continuous persistence, or no continuous change, of at
least one aspect essential for its total unity, and so inseparable from it as
a whole. This part is played by the presentative form of time which is immanent in the stream of consciousness, which latter appears as a unity in
time (not in the time of the world of things, but in the time which appears
together with the stream of consciousness itself, and in which the stream
ﬂows). Each instant of this time is given in a continuous projective series of
(so-to-speak) ‘time-sensations’; in each actual phase of the stream of consciousness the whole time-horizon of the stream is presented, and it thereby
possesses a form overreaching all its contents, which remains the same form
continuously, though its content steadily alters.

208 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

This accordingly forms the phenomenological content of the ego, of the
empirical ego in the sense of the psychic subject. Phenomenological reduction
yields the really self-enclosed, temporally growing unity of the stream of
experience. The notion of experience has widened out from what is inwardly
perceived, and that is in this sense conscious, to the notion of the ‘phenomenological ego’, by which the empirical ego is intentionally constituted.

§8 The pure ego and awareness (‘Bewusstheit’)
We have not so far referred to the pure ego (the ego of ‘pure apperception’)
which for many Kantians, and likewise for many empirical investigators,
provides the unitary centre of relation, to which all conscious content is as
such referred in a wholly peculiar fashion. To the fact of ‘subjective experience’ or consciousness, this pure ego is accordingly held to pertain
essentially. ‘Consciousness is relation to the ego’, and whatever stands in
this relation is a content of consciousness. ‘We call anything content if it is
related to an ego in consciousness: its other properties are irrelevant.’ ‘This
relation is plainly one and the same despite manifold variation of content: it
constitutes, in fact, what is common and speciﬁc to consciousness. We mark
it off ’, says Natorp (whom we are continuously quoting),7 ‘by the special
expression “awareness” (Bewusstheit) to distinguish it from the total fact of
consciousness.’
The ego as subjective centre of relation for all contents in my consciousness, cannot be compared to what are contrasted with it, it is not relative to them as they are to it, it is not consciously given to its contents as
they are given to it. It reveals itself as sui generis in its incapacity to be
in anything else’s consciousness, while other things are in its consciousness. It cannot itself be a content, and resembles nothing that could be
a content of consciousness. For this reason, it can be no further described, since all descriptive terms we might seek to employ, could be
drawn only from the content of consciousness, and could not therefore
hit off the ego, or a relation to the ego. Otherwise put: each idea we
could make of the ego would turn it into an object, but we have ceased
to think of it as an ego, if we think of it as an object. To be an ego is not
to be an object, but to be something opposed to all objects, for which
they are objects. The same holds of their relation to the ego. Beingin-consciousness means being-objective for an ego: such being-objective
cannot in its turn be made into an object.
The fact of awareness, while it is the basic fact of psychology, can be
acknowledged and specially emphasized, but it can neither be deﬁned
nor deduced from anything else.
These statements are impressive, but closer consideration fails to substantiate them. How can we assert such a ‘basic fact of psychology’, if we

Consciousness as the phenomenological subsistence of the ego 209

are unable to think it, and how can we think it, if not by making the ego and
consciousness, both subject-matters of our assertion, into ‘objects’? This
might be done if we thought of this fact only in indirect, symbolic fashion.
Natorp, however, wants it to be a ‘basic fact’, which must as such surely be
given in direct intuition. He in fact tells us that it ‘can be acknowledged and
specially emphasized’. Surely what is acknowledged or emphasized will be
content? Surely it will be made into an object? Perhaps, indeed, some narrower
concept of object is excluded, but the wider concept is here relevant. A taking
note of a thought, a sensation, a stirring of displeasure etc., makes these
experiences objects of inner perception, without making them objects in the
sense of things, just so, the ego as relational centre, and any particular relation of the ego to some content, will, if taken note of, be objectively given.
I must frankly confess, however, that I am quite unable to ﬁnd this ego,
this primitive, necessary centre of relations.8 The only thing I can take note
of, and therefore perceive, are the empirical ego and its empirical relations
to its own experiences, or to such external objects as are receiving special
attention at the moment, while much remains, whether ‘without’ or ‘within’,
which has no such relation to the ego.
I can only clarify this situation by subjecting the empirical ego, with its
empirical relation to objects, to phenomenological analysis, from which the
above conception necessarily results. We excluded the body-ego, whose
appearances resemble those of any other physical thing, and dealt with the
mind-ego, which is empirically bound up with the former, and appears as
belonging to it. Reduced to data that are phenomenologically actual, this
yields us the complex of reﬂectively graspable experiences described above,
a complex which stands in the same sort of relation to the mental ego as the
side of a perceived external thing open to perception stands to the whole
thing. The conscious intentional relation of the ego to its objects means for
me simply that intentional experiences whose intentional objects are the egobody, the personal ego-mind and therefore the entire empirical ego-subject
or human person, are included in the total phenomenological being of a
unity of consciousness, and that such intentional experiences also constitute
an essential phenomenological kernel in the phenomenal ego.
This brings us to our third concept of consciousness, deﬁned in terms of
‘acts’ or ‘intentional experiences’, which will be analysed in our next chapter.
If the peculiar character of intentional experiences is contested, if one refuses
to admit, what for us is most certain, that being-an-object consists phenomenologically in certain acts in which something appears, or is thought of
as our object, it will not be intelligible how being-an-object can itself be
objective to us. For us the matter is quite clear: there are acts ‘trained upon’
the character of acts in which something appears, or there are acts trained
upon the empirical ego and its relation to the object. The phenomenological
kernel of the empirical ego here consists of acts which bring objects to its
notice, acts in which the ego directs itself to the appropriate object.

210 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

I am unable, further, to grasp the view that the relation of the ego to
conscious content is bare of all difference. For if by ‘content’ we mean the
experience which forms the real side of the phenomenological ego, surely
the way in which contents enter the unity of experience will depend throughout on their speciﬁc nature, which is true of all parts that enter into wholes?
But, if by ‘content’ we mean some object upon which consciousness ‘directs
itself’, whether perceivingly, imaginingly, retrospectively, expectantly, conceptually or predicatively etc., then it plainly involves many differences,
obvious even in running through the expressions just used.
Objection may be raised to our previous assertion that the ego appears to
itself, enjoys a consciousness and, in particular, a perception of itself. Selfperception of the empirical ego is, however, a daily business, which involves
no difﬁculty for understanding. We perceive the ego, just as we perceive an
external thing. That the object does not offer all its parts and sides to perception is as irrelevant in this case as in that. For perception is essentially the
presumptive apprehension of some object, not its adequate intuition. Perception itself, though part of the ego’s phenomenological being, naturally falls,
like so much else in consciousness that evades notice, beyond the glance of
perception, much as ungrasped, yet apparent, aspects of a perceived external thing are not themselves perceived. Ego and thing are in either case said
to be perceived, and perceived they indeed are, and in full, ‘bodily’ presence.
Additional Note to the Second Edition. I must expressly emphasize that the
attitude here taken up to the question of the pure ego – an attitude I no longer
endorse, as remarked before – is irrelevant to the investigations of this volume.
Important as this question may be, phenomenologically or in other respects,
there remain wide ﬁelds of phenomenological problems, relating more or less
generally to the real content of intentional experiences, and to their relation
of essence to intentional objects, which can be systematically explored without taking up any stance on the ego-issue. The present investigations are
entirely conﬁned to such problems. But since such an important work as
volume I of P. Natorp’s Second Edition of his Einleitung in die Psychologie
concerns itself with what I have said above, I have not simply struck it out.

Chapter 2

Consciousness as intentional experience 211

Consciousness as intentional
experience

We must now embark upon a fuller analytic discussion of our third concept
of consciousness, which ranges over the same phenomenological ﬁeld as the
concept of ‘mental act’. In connection with this, talk of conscious contents,
talk in particular concerning contents of presentations, judgements etc., gains
a variety of meanings, which it is all-important to sort out and to subject to
the sharpest scrutiny.

§9 The meaning of Brentano’s demarcation of
‘psychic phenomena’
Among the demarcations of classes in descriptive psychology, there is none
more remarkable nor more important philosophically than the one offered
by Brentano under his title of ‘psychical phenomena’, and used by him in
his well-known division of phenomena into psychical and physical. Not
that I can approve of the great thinker’s guiding conviction, plain from the
very terms that he uses, that he had achieved an exhaustive classiﬁcation
of ‘phenomena’ through which the ﬁeld of psychological research could be
kept apart from that of natural science, and through which the vexed question
of the right delimitation of the ﬁelds of these disciplines could be very simply
solved. Possibly a good sense can be given to deﬁning psychology as the
science of psychical phenomena, and to the coordinated deﬁnition of natural
science as the science of physical phenomena, but there are good reasons
for disputing the view that the concepts which occur in Brentano’s division
are those found under like names in the deﬁnitions in question. It can be
shown that not all ‘psychical phenomena’ in the sense of a possible deﬁnition of psychology, are psychical phenomena (i.e. mental acts) in Brentano’s
sense, and that, on the other hand, many genuine ‘psychical phenomena’ fall
under Brentano’s ambiguous rubric of ‘physical phenomena’.1 The value of
Brentano’s conception of a ‘psychical phenomenon’ is, however, quite independent of the aims that inspired it. A sharply deﬁned class of experiences is
here brought before us, comprising all that enjoys mental, conscious existence in a certain pregnant sense of these words. A real being deprived of

212 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

such experiences, merely having2 contents inside it such as the experiences
of sensation, but unable to interpret these objectively, or otherwise use them
to make objects present to itself, quite incapable, therefore, of referring to
objects in further acts of judgement, joy, grief, love, hatred, desire and
loathing – such a being would not be called ‘psychical’ by anyone. If one
doubts whether it is at all possible to conceive of such a being, a mere
complex of sensations, one has but to point to external phenomenal things,
present to consciousness through sensational complexes, but not appearing
as such themselves, and called by us ‘bodies’ or ‘inanimate things’, since
they lack all psychical experiences in the sense of our examples. Turning
aside from psychology, and entering the ﬁeld of the philosophical disciplines
proper, we perceive the fundamental importance of our class of experiences,
since only its members are relevant in the highest ranks of the normative
sciences. They alone, seized in their phenomenological purity, furnish concrete bases for abstracting the fundamental notions that function systematically in logic, ethics and aesthetics, and that enter into the ideal laws of
these sciences. Our mention of logic recalls the particular interest which has
inspired our whole probing into such experiences.

§10 Descriptive characterization of acts as
‘intentional’ experiences
We must now dig down to the essence of Brentano’s demarcation of phenomenal classes, of his concept of consciousness in the sense of psychical
act. Moved by the interest in classiﬁcation just mentioned, Brentano conducts his enquiry in the form of a two-edged separation of the two main
classes of ‘phenomena’ that he recognizes, the psychical and the physical.
He arrives at a sixfold differentiation in which only two heads are relevant
for our purpose, since in all the others misleading ambiguities do their destructive work, rendering untenable his notion of ‘phenomenon’ in general
and of ‘physical phenomenon’ in particular, as well as his concepts of internal
and external perception.3
Of his two principal differentiations, one directly reveals the essence of
psychical phenomena or acts. This strikes us unmistakably in any illustration
we choose. In perception something is perceived, in imagination, something
imagined, in a statement something stated, in love something loved, in hate
hated, in desire desired etc. Brentano looks to what is graspably common to
such instances, and says that ‘every mental phenomenon is characterized by
what the mediaeval schoolmen called the intentional (or mental) inexistence
of an object, and by what we, not without ambiguity, call the relation to a
content, the direction to an object (by which a reality is not to be understood) or an immanent objectivity. Each mental phenomenon contains something as object in itself, though not all in the same manner.’4 This ‘manner
in which consciousness refers to an object’ (an expression used by Brentano

Consciousness as intentional experience 213

in other passages) is presentative in a presentation, judicial in a judgement
etc. etc. Brentano’s attempted classiﬁcation of mental phenomena into presentations, judgements and emotions (‘phenomena of love and hate’) is plainly
based upon this ‘manner of reference’, of which three basically different
kinds are distinguished (each admitting of many further speciﬁcations).
Whether we think Brentano’s classiﬁcation of ‘psychical’ phenomena
successful, and whether we think it basically signiﬁcant for the whole treatment of psychology, as Brentano claims it is, does not matter here. Only one
point has importance for us: that there are essential, speciﬁc differences of
intentional relation or intention (the generic descriptive character of ‘acts’).
The manner in which a ‘mere presentation’ refers to its object, differs from
the manner of a judgement, which treats the same state of affairs as true or
false. Quite different again is the manner of a surmise or doubt, the manner
of a hope or a fear, of approval or disapproval, of desire or aversion; of the
resolution of a theoretical doubt ( judgemental decision) or of a practical
doubt (voluntary decision in the case of deliberate choice); of the conﬁrmation of a theoretical opinion (fulﬁlment of a judgemental intention), or of a
voluntary intention (fulﬁlment of what we mean to do). Most, if not all, acts
are complex experiences, very often involving intentions which are themselves multiple. Emotional intentions are built upon presentative or judging
intentions etc. We cannot, however, doubt that to resolve such complexes is
always to come down on primitive intentional characters whose descriptive
essence precludes reduction into other types of experience, and that the
unity of the descriptive genus ‘intention’ (‘act-character’) displays speciﬁc
differences, ﬂowing from its pure essence, which take a priori precedence
over empirical, psychological matters-of-fact. There are essentially different
species and subspecies of intention. We cannot, in particular, reduce all differences in acts into differences in the presentations or judgements they
involve, with help only from elements not of an intentional kind. Aesthetic
approval or disapproval, e.g., is evidently and essentially a peculiar mode
of intentional relation as opposed to the mere presentation or theoretical
assessment of the aesthetic object. Aesthetic approval and aesthetic predicates may be asserted, and their assertion is a judgement, and as such includes
presentations. But the aesthetic intention and its objects are then objects
of presentations and judgements: it remains essentially distinct from these
theoretical acts. To evaluate a judgement as valid, an emotional experience
as elevated etc., presupposes analogous, closely related, not speciﬁcally
identical intentions. Just so in comparisons of judgemental with voluntary
decisions etc.
We take intentional relation, understood in purely descriptive fashion as
an inward peculiarity of certain experiences, to be the essential feature of
‘psychical phenomena’ or ‘acts’, seeing in Brentano’s deﬁnition of them as
‘phenomena intentionally containing objects in themselves’ a circumscription of essence, whose ‘reality’ (in the traditional sense) is of course ensured

214 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

by examples.5 Differently put in terms of pure phenomenology: Ideation
performed in exemplary cases of such experiences – and so performed as
to leave empirical-psychological conception and existential afﬁrmation of
being out of account, and to deal only with the real phenomenological content of these experiences – yields us the pure, phenomenological generic Idea
of intentional experience or act, and of its various pure species.6 That not
all experiences are intentional is proved by sensations and sensational complexes. Any piece of a sensed visual ﬁeld, full as it is of visual contents, is an
experience containing many part-contents, which are neither referred to, nor
intentionally objective, in the whole.
The discussions which follow will give precision and clarity to the fundamentally different uses of the word ‘content’. Everywhere it will appear that
what one grasped in the analysis and comparison of instances of the two
sorts of contents, can be ideationally seen as a pure distinction of essence. The
phenomenological assertions we aim at, are all meant by us (even without
special pointing) as assertions of essence.
A second characterization of mental phenomena by Brentano that has
value for us is the formula ‘that they are either presentations or founded
upon presentations’.7 ‘Nothing can be judged about, nothing can likewise be
desired, nothing can be hoped or feared, if it is not presented.’8 In this characterization the term ‘presentation’ does not of course mean the presented
content or object, but the act of presenting this.
This characterization does not seem a suitable starting-point for our researches, since it presupposes a concept of ‘presentation’ that has yet to be
worked out: it is hard to draw distinctions among the word’s highly ambiguous uses. The discussion of the concept of ‘act’ will lead us naturally on to
this. But the characterization is an important utterance, whose content
prompts further investigations: we shall have to come back to it later.

§11 Avoidance of verbally tempting misunderstandings.
(a) The ‘mental’ or ‘immanent’ object
While we adhere to Brentano’s essential characterization, our departures
from his opinions force us to abandon his terminology. It will be as well to
drop talk of ‘psychical phenomena’, or of ‘phenomena’ at all, where we are
dealing with experiences of the class in question. ‘Psychical phenomena’ is a
justiﬁable phrase only on Brentano’s view that it fairly circumscribes the
psychological ﬁeld of research: on our view all experiences are in this respect
on a level. The term ‘phenomenon’ is likewise fraught with most dangerous
ambiguities, and insinuates a quite doubtful theoretical persuasion, expressly
professed by Brentano, that each intentional experience is a phenomenon.
As ‘phenomenon’ in its dominant use (which is also Brentano’s) means an
appearing object as such, this implies that each intentional experience is not
only directed upon objects, but is itself the object of certain intentional

Consciousness as intentional experience 215

experiences. One thinks here, mainly, of the experiences in which things
‘appear’ in the most special sense, i.e. perceptions: ‘every psychical phenomenon is an object of inner consciousness’. We have already mentioned the
grave misgivings that keep us from assenting to this.
Further objections surround the expressions used by Brentano as parallel
with, or roughly circumscribing, his term ‘psychical phenomenon’, and
which are also in general use. It is always quite questionable, and frequently
misleading, to say that perceived, imagined, asserted or desired objects etc.,
‘enter consciousness’ (or do so in perceptual, presentative fashion etc.), or
to say conversely that ‘consciousness’, ‘the ego’ enters into this or that sort
of relation to them, or to say that such objects ‘are taken up into consciousness’ in this or that way, or to say, similarly, that intentional experiences
‘contain something as their object in themselves’ etc. etc.9 Such expressions
promote two misunderstandings: ﬁrst, that we are dealing with a real (realen)
event or a real (reales) relationship, taking place between ‘consciousness’
or ‘the ego’, on the one hand, and the thing of which there is consciousness,
on the other; secondly, that we are dealing with a relation between two
things, both present in equally real fashion (reell) in consciousness, an act
and an intentional object, or with a sort of box-within-box structure of
mental contents. If talk of a relation is here inescapable, we must avoid
expressions which tempt us to regard such a relation as having psychological reality (Realita·t), as belonging to the real (reellen) content of an
experience.
Let us ﬁrst discuss our second misunderstanding more closely. It is particularly suggested by the expression ‘immanent objectivity’ used to name
the essential peculiarity of intentional experiences, and likewise by the
equivalent scholastic expressions ‘intentional’ or ‘mental inexistence’ of an
object. Intentional experiences have the peculiarity of directing themselves
in varying fashion to presented objects, but they do so in an intentional sense.
An object is ‘referred to’10 or ‘aimed at’ in them, and in presentative or judging or other fashion. This means no more than that certain experiences
are present, intentional in character and, more speciﬁcally, presentatively,
judgingly, desiringly or otherwise intentional. There are (to ignore certain
exceptions) not two things present in experience, we do not experience the
object and beside it the intentional experience directed upon it, there are not
even two things present in the sense of a part and a whole which contains
it: only one thing is present, the intentional experience, whose essential
descriptive character is the intention in question. According to its particular
speciﬁcation, it constitutes the full and sole presentation, judgement etc.
etc., of this object. If this experience is present, then, eo ipso and through its
own essence (we must insist), the intentional ‘relation’ to an object is achieved,
and an object is ‘intentionally present’; these two phrases mean precisely the
same. And of course such an experience may be present in consciousness
together with its intention, although its object does not exist at all, and is

216 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

perhaps incapable of existence. The object is ‘meant’, i.e. to ‘mean’ it is an
experience, but it is then merely entertained in thought, and is nothing in
reality.
If I have an idea of the god Jupiter, this god is my presented object, he is
‘immanently present’ in my act, he has ‘mental inexistence’ in the latter, or
whatever expression we may use to disguise our true meaning. I have an
idea of the god Jupiter: this means that I have a certain presentative experience, the presentation-of-the-god-Jupiter is realized in my consciousness.
This intentional experience may be dismembered as one chooses in descriptive analysis, but the god Jupiter naturally will not be found in it. The
‘immanent’, ‘mental object’ is not therefore part of the descriptive or real
make-up (deskriptiven reellen Bestand ) of the experience, it is in truth not
really immanent or mental. But it also does not exist extramentally, it does
not exist at all. This does not prevent our-idea-of-the-god-Jupiter from being
actual, a particular sort of experience or particular mode of mindedness
(Zumutesein), such that he who experiences it may rightly say that the mythical king of the gods is present to him, concerning whom there are such
and such stories. If, however, the intended object exists, nothing becomes
phenomenologically different. It makes no essential difference to an object
presented and given to consciousness whether it exists, or is ﬁctitious, or is
perhaps completely absurd. I think of Jupiter as I think of Bismarck, of the
tower of Babel as I think of Cologne Cathedral, of a regular thousand-sided
polygon as of a regular thousand-faced solid.11
These so-called immanent contents are therefore merely intended or intentional, while truly immanent contents, which belong to the real make-up
(reellen Bestande) of the intentional experiences, are not intentional: they
constitute the act, provide necessary points d’appui which render possible an
intention, but are not themselves intended, not the objects presented in the
act. I do not see colour-sensations but coloured things, I do not hear tonesensations but the singer’s song, etc. etc.12
What is true of presentations is true also of other intentional experiences
that are built upon them. To represent an object, e.g. the Schloss at Berlin,
to oneself, is, we said, to be minded in this or that descriptively determinate
fashion. To judge about this Schloss, to delight in its architectural beauty, to
cherish the wish that one could do so etc. etc., are new experiences, characterized in novel phenomenological terms. All have this in common, that
they are modes of objective intention, which cannot be otherwise expressed
than by saying that the Schloss is perceived, imagined, pictorially represented, judged about, delighted in, wished for etc. etc.
We shall need more elaborate investigation to determine the justiﬁcation
of talking ﬁguratively about the object presented in a presentation, judged
in a judgement etc., as well as the full sense of talk about the relation of acts
to objects. It is clear, at least, as far as we now have penetrated, that it will
be well to avoid all talk of immanent objectivity. It is readily dispensed with,

Consciousness as intentional experience 217

since we have the expression ‘intentional object’ which is not exposed to
similar objections.
As regards misleading talk of the intentional ‘containment’ of objects in
acts, it is undeniable that the parallel, equivalent locutions – ‘the object is a
conscious datum’, ‘is in consciousness’, ‘is immanent in consciousness’ etc. –
suffer from a most damaging ambiguity; ‘being conscious’ (bewusst) here
means something quite different from the possible senses given to it in the
two previously discussed meanings of ‘consciousness’. All modern psychology and epistemology have been confused by these and similar equivocations. With psychological thought and terminology as inﬂuential as they are
now, it would be ill-advised to set up our own terms in opposition to those
of contemporary psychology. Our ﬁrst concept of consciousness, given an
empirical-psychological slant, covers the whole stream of experience which
makes up the individual mind’s real unity, together with all aspects that
enter into the constitution of this stream. This conception shows signs of
spreading to psychology, and we therefore decided in our last chapter to
give the preference to it, though we did so in phenomenological purity and
not from a properly psychological angle. We must therefore exercise some
necessary care in talking of consciousness as inner perception, or in talking
of it as intentional relation, even if we do not altogether avoid such ‘uses’,
which would scarcely be practicable.

§12 (b) The act and the relation of consciousness or
the ego to the object
The situation is similar as regards the ﬁrst misunderstanding we mentioned,
where it is imagined that consciousness, on the one hand, and the ‘matter in
consciousness’ on the other, become related to one another in a real sense.
(‘The ego’ is here often put in the place of ‘consciousness’.) In natural reﬂection, in fact, it is not the single act which appears, but the ego as one pole of
the relation in question, while the other pole is the object. If one then studies
an act-experience, which last tempts one to make of the ego an essential,
selfsame point of unity in every act. This would, however, bring us back to
the view of the ego as a relational centre which we repudiated before.
But if we simply ‘live’ in the act in question, become absorbed, e.g., in the
perceptual ‘taking in’ of some event happening before us, in some play of
fancy, in reading a story, in carrying out a mathematical proof etc., the
ego as relational centre of our performances becomes quite elusive. The idea
of the ego may be specially ready to come to the fore, or rather to be
recreated anew, but only when it is really so recreated, and built into our
act, do we refer to the object in a manner to which something descriptively
ostensible corresponds. We have here, in the actual experience described, a
correspondingly complex act which presents the ego, on the one hand, and
the presentation, judgement, wish etc., of the moment, with its relevant

218 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

subject-matter, on the other. From an objective standpoint (and so, too,
from the standpoint of natural reﬂection) it is doubtless the case that in each
act the ego is intentionally directed to some object. This is quite obvious
since the ego is either no more than the ‘conscious unity’, or contemporary
‘bundle’, of experiences, or, in a more natural empirically-real (realer) perspective, the continuous thing-like unity, constituted in the unity of consciousness as the personal subject of our experiences, the ego whose mental
states these experiences are, that performs the intention, percept, or judgement in question. If such and such an intentional experience is present, the
ego eo ipso has the corresponding intention.
The sentences ‘The ego represents an object to itself’, ‘The ego refers
presentatively to an object’, ‘The ego has something as an intentional object
of its presentation’ therefore mean the same as ‘In the phenomenological
ego, a concrete complex of experiences, a certain experience said, in virtue
of its speciﬁc nature, to be a presentation of object X, is really (reell) present.’
Just so the sentence ‘The ego judges about the object’ means the same as
‘such and such an experience of judging is present in the ego’ etc. etc. In our
description relation to an experiencing ego is inescapable, but the experience
described is not itself an experiential complex having the ego-presentation
as its part. We perform the description after an objectifying act of reﬂection,
in which reﬂection on the ego is combined with reﬂection on the experienced
act to yield a relational act, in which the ego appears as itself related to
its act’s object through its act. Plainly an essential descriptive change has
occurred. The original act is no longer simply there, we no longer live in it,
but we attend to it and pass judgement on it.
We must therefore avoid the misunderstanding which our present discussion has just ruled out, that of treating relation to an ego as of the essence of
an intentional experience itself.13

§13 The fixing of our terminology
After these critical prolegomena, we shall now ﬁx our own terminology,
excluding as far as we can, and in their light, all conﬂicting assumptions and
confusing ambiguities. We shall avoid the term ‘psychical phenomenon’
entirely, and shall talk of ‘intentional experiences’ wherever accuracy requires it. ‘Experience’ must be understood in the phenomenological sense
ﬁxed above. The qualifying adjective ‘intentional’ names the essence common to the class of experiences we wish to mark off, the peculiarity of
intending, of referring to what is objective, in a presentative or other analogous fashion. As a briefer expression, in harmony with our own and foreign
verbal usage, we shall use the term ‘act’.
These expressions certainly have their defects. We speak of ‘intending’
[not, of course, in English: Trans.] in the sense of specially noticing, or
attending to something. An intentional object need not, however, always be

Consciousness as intentional experience 219

noticed or attended to. Several acts may be present and interwoven with one
another, but attention is emphatically active in one of them. We experience
them all together, but we ‘go all out’ (as it were) in this particular one. But
it is not unﬁtting, in view of the traditional use of the term ‘intentional
object’, to which Brentano has given renewed currency, to speak in a correlative sense of ‘intention’, especially when we have the term ‘attending’ to
do the work of ‘intention’ in the other sense; we shall ﬁnd reason to hold
that attention does not involve a peculiar act.14 Another ambiguity, however, confronts us. The term ‘intention’ hits off the peculiarity of acts by
imagining them to aim at something, and so ﬁts the numerous cases that are
naturally and understandably ranked as cases of theoretical aiming. But the
metaphor does not ﬁt all acts equally, and if we study the examples enumerated in §10, we cannot avoid distinguishing a narrower and a wider concept
of intention. In our metaphor an act of hitting the mark corresponds to that
of aiming, and just so certain acts correspond as ‘achievements’ or ‘fulﬁlments’
to other acts as ‘intentions’ (whether of the judging or the desiring sort).
The image therefore ﬁts these latter acts quite perfectly; fulﬁlments are,
however, themselves acts, i.e. ‘intentions’, though they are not intentions –
at least not in general – in that narrower sense which points to corresponding
fulﬁlments. This ambiguity, once recognized, becomes harmless. But of course,
where the narrower concept is wanted, this must be expressly stated. The
equivalent term ‘act-character’ will also help to avoid misunderstandings.
In talking of ‘acts’, on the other hand, we must steer clear of the word’s
original meaning: all thought of activity must be rigidly excluded.15 The term
‘act’ is so ﬁrmly ﬁxed in the usage of many psychologists, and so wellworn
and loosed from its original sense that, after these express reservations, we
can go on using it without concern. If we do not wish to introduce artiﬁcial
novelties, strange alike to our living speech-sense and to historical tradition,
we can hardly avoid inconvenience of the just-mentioned sort.

§14 Difficulties which surround the assumption of acts
as a descriptively founded class of experiences
In all these terminological discussions, we have gone deep into descriptive
analyses of a sort required by our interests in logic and epistemology. Before
we go deeper, however, we shall have to consider some objections which
affect the bases of our descriptions.
There are a group of thinkers who absolutely reject any marking-off of a
class of experiences which have been described by us as ‘acts’ or ‘intentional
experiences’. In this connection Brentano’s original introduction of the
distinction, and his aims in introducing it, have, with some surreptitious
misunderstandings, produced confusion: they have kept the distinction’s
extraordinarily valuable descriptive content from being rightly assessed.
Natorp, e.g., rejects it decisively. But when this distinguished thinker objects

220 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

by saying that16 ‘I can deal with a tone by itself or in relation to other contents of consciousness, without also paying regard to its being for an ego,
but I cannot deal with myself and my hearing by themselves, without
thinking of the tone’, we ﬁnd nothing in this that could confuse. Hearing
certainly cannot be torn out of the hearing of a tone, as if it were something
apart from the tone it hears. But this does not mean that two things are
not to be distinguished: the tone heard, the object of perception, and the
hearing of the tone, the perceptual act. Natorp is quite right in saying of
the former: ‘Its existence for me is my consciousness of it. If anyone can
catch his consciousness in anything else than the existence of a content for
him, I am unable to follow him.’ It seems to me, however, that the ‘existence
of something for me’, is a thing both permitting and requiring further
phenomenological analysis. Consider, ﬁrst, differences in the mode of attention. A content is differently present to me, according as I note it implicitly,
not relieved in some whole, or see it in relief, according as I see it marginally, or have specially turned my focussing gaze upon it. More important
still are differences between the existence of a content in consciousness in
the sense in which a sensation so exists, without being itself made a perceptual object, and of a content which is made such an object. The choice of
a tone as an instance slightly obscures the distinction without altogether
removing it. ‘I hear’ can mean in psychology ‘I am having sensations’: in
ordinary speech it means ‘I am perceiving’; I hear the adagio of the violin,
the twittering of the birds etc. Different acts can perceive the same object
and yet involve quite different sensations. The same tone is at one moment
heard close at hand, at another far away. The same sensational contents are
likewise ‘taken’ now in this, and now in that manner. What is most emphasized in the doctrine of apperception is generally the fact that consistency of
stimulus does not involve constancy of sensational content; what the stimulus really provokes is overlaid by features springing from actualized dispositions left behind them by previous experiences. Such notions are, however,
inadequate and, above all, phenomenologically irrelevant. Whatever the
origin of the experienced contents now present in consciousness, we can
think that the same sensational contents should be present with a differing
interpretation, i.e. that the same contents should serve to ground perceptions of different objects. Interpretation itself can never be reduced to an
inﬂux of new sensations; it is an act-character, a mode of consciousness, of
‘mindedness’ (Zumuteseins). We call the experiencing of sensations in this
conscious manner the perception of the object in question. What has here
been made plain, in a context of natural existence, and by methods appropriate to psychology and natural science, will yield up its phenomenological
substance if we abstract from the empirically real (Realen). If we consider
pure experiences and their own essential content, we form Ideas of pure
species and speciﬁc situations, in this case the pure species of Sensation,
Interpretation, Perception in relation to its perceptum, and the relations of

Consciousness as intentional experience 221

essence among these. We then see it to be a fact of essence that the being of
a sensational content differs from that of the perceived object presented by
it, which is not a reality in consciousness (reell bewusst).17
All this becomes clear if we change our ﬁeld of illustration for that of
vision. Let us lay the following considerations before a sceptic. I see a thing,
e.g. this box, but I do not see my sensations. I always see one and the same
box, however it may be turned and tilted. I have always the same ‘content of
consciousness’ – if I care to call the perceived object a content of consciousness. But each turn yields a new ‘content of consciousness’, if I call experienced contents ‘contents of consciousness’, in a much more appropriate use
of words. Very different contents are therefore experienced, though the same
object is perceived. The experienced content, generally speaking, is not the
perceived object. We must note, further, that the object’s real being or nonbeing is irrelevant to the true essence of the perceptual experience, and to
its essence as a perceiving of an object as thus and thus appearing, and as
thus and thus thought of. In the ﬂux of experienced content, we imagine
ourselves to be in perceptual touch with one and the same object; this itself
belongs to the sphere of what we experience. For we experience a ‘consciousness of identity’, i.e. a claim to apprehend identity. On what does this
consciousness depend? Must we not reply that different sensational contents
are given, but that we apperceive or ‘take’ them ‘in the same sense’, and that
to take them in this sense is an experienced character through which the ‘being
of the object for me’ is ﬁrst constituted. Must we not say, further, that the
consciousness of identity is framed on a basis of these two sorts of experienced characters, as the immediate consciousness that they mean the same?
And is this consciousness not again an act in our deﬁned sense, whose
objective correlate lies in the identity it refers to? These questions, I think,
call for an afﬁrmative and evident answer. I ﬁnd nothing more plain than
the distinction here apparent between contents and acts, between perceptual
contents in the sense of presentative sensations, and perceptual acts in the
sense of interpretative intentions overlaid with various additional characters. Such intentions, united with the sensations they interpret, make up the
full concrete act of perception. Intentional characters and complete intentional acts are, of course, contents of consciousness in the widest descriptive
sense of experiences: all differences predicable at all, are in this sense eo ipso
differences of content. But within this widest sphere of what can be experienced, we believe we have found an evident difference between intentional
experiences, in whose case objective intentions arise through immanent characters of the experiences in question, and experiences in whose case this does
not occur, contents that may serve as the building-stones of acts without
being acts themselves.
Examples that will serve to elucidate this distinction, and also to show up
various characters of acts, are provided by comparing perception with
memory, or comparing either with presentations by means of physical images

222 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

(paintings, statues etc.), or of signs. Verbal expressions yield the best examples of all. Let us imagine18 that certain arabesques or ﬁgures have affected
us aesthetically, and that we then suddenly see that we are dealing with
symbols or verbal signs. In what does this difference consist? Or let us take
the case of an attentive man hearing some totally strange word as a soundcomplex without even dreaming it is a word, and compare this with the case
of the same man afterwards hearing the word, in the course of conversation,
and now acquainted with its meaning, but not illustrating it intuitively?
What in general is the surplus element distinguishing the understanding of a
symbolically functioning expression from the uncomprehended verbal sound?
What is the difference between simply looking at a concrete object A, and
treating it as representative of ‘any A whatsoever’? In this and countless
similar cases it is act-characters that differ. All logical differences, and differences in categorial form, are constituted in logical acts in the sense of
intentions.
In analysing such cases the inadequacies of the modern theory of apperception become plain: it overlooks points decisive from a logical or epistemological standpoint. It does not do justice to phenomenological fact; it
does not even attempt to analyse or describe it. Differences of interpretation
are above all descriptive differences, and these alone, rather than obscure,
hypothetical events in the soul’s unconscious depths, or in the sphere of
physiological happenings, concern the epistemologist. These alone permit of
a purely phenomenological treatment, excluding all transcendent afﬁrmations,
such as the critique of knowledge presupposes. Apperception is our surplus,
which is found in experience itself, in its descriptive content as opposed to the
raw existence of sense: it is the act-character which as it were ensouls sense,
and is in essence such as to make us perceive this or that object, see this tree,
e.g., hear this ringing, smell this scent of ﬂowers etc. etc. Sensations, and the
acts ‘interpreting’ them or apperceiving them, are alike experienced, but they
do not appear as objects: they are not seen, heard or perceived by any sense.
Objects on the other hand, appear and are perceived, but they are not
experienced. Naturally we exclude the case of adequate perception.
The same holds in other cases: it holds, e.g., in the case of the ‘sensations’
(or however we choose to call contents serving as bases to interpretation)
which are found in acts of simple or representative imagining. It is an imaging
interpretation that sets an imagined rather than a perceptual appearance
before us, where experienced sensations mediate the appearance of a pictorially presented object (e.g. a centaur in a painting).19 One sees at once that
the very same thing which, in relation to the intentional object, is called its
presentation, i.e. the perceiving, remembering, picturing, symbolizing intention directed towards it, is also called an interpretation, conception, apperception in relation to the sensations really present in this act.
I also regard it as relevantly evident, in regard to the examples just cited, that
there are different ‘manners of consciousness’, different intentional relations

Consciousness as intentional experience 223

to objects: the character of our intention is speciﬁcally different in the case
of perceiving, of direct ‘reproductive’ recall, of pictorial representation (in
the ordinary sense of the interpretation of statues, pictures etc.), and again
in the case of a presentation through signs. Each logically distinct way of
entertaining an object in thought corresponds to a difference in intention.
To me it seems irrefragable that we only know of such differences because
we envisage them in particular cases (apprehend them adequately and immediately), can then compare them and range them under concepts, and
can thus make them into objects of varying acts of intuition and thought.
From such ‘seeing’ we can, through abstract Ideation, progress toward an
adequate grasp of the pure species they exemplify, and of the connections
of essence among these latter. When Natorp remarks that ‘all richness, all
multiplicity of consciousness pertains rather to contents alone. Consciousness of a simple sensation does not differ, qua consciousness, from consciousness of a world: the “being in consciousness” is entirely the same in
both; their difference lies solely in their content’, he seems to me not to be
keeping apart quite distinct notions of consciousness and content, and to
be erecting his identiﬁcation into an epistemological principle. We have
explained the sense in which we too teach that all multiplicity of consciousness depends on content. Content must mean experience, a real part of consciousness: consciousness itself must be the complex formed by experiences.
The world, however, never is a thinker’s experience. To refer to the world
may be an experience, but the world itself is the object intended. It is immaterial, from the point of view of our distinction, what attitude one takes up
to the question of the make-up of objective being, of the true, real inner
being of the world or of any other object, or of the relation of objective
being, as a ‘unity’, to our ‘manifold’ thought-approaches, or of the sense in
which one may metaphysically oppose immanent to transcendent being. The
distinction in question is prior to all metaphysics, and lies at the very gates
of the theory of knowledge: it presupposes no answers to the questions that
this theory must be the ﬁrst to provide.

§15 Whether experiences of one and the same
phenomenological kind (of the genus Feeling in
particular) can consist partly of acts and partly
of non-acts
A new difﬁculty arises in regard to the generic unity of intentional experiences.
It might be thought that the standpoint from which we divide experiences into intentional and non-intentional, is a merely external one, that the
same experiences, or experiences of the same phenomenological class, may
at times have an intentional relation to some object, and at times have none.
The examples used to attest either concept, and also, in part, the attempted
solutions of the problem, have already been discussed in literary fashion in

224 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

regard to the debated issue as to whether the ‘intentional relation’ sufﬁces to
demarcate ‘psychical phenomena’ (the domain of psychology) or not. The
debate centred chieﬂy in phenomena from the sphere of feeling. Since the
intentionality of other feelings seemed obvious, two doubts were possible:
one wondered whether intentionality might not perhaps attach loosely to
the acts of feeling in question, belonging really to the presentations fused
with them, or whether intentionality could be essential to the class of feelings, since one allowed it to some feelings while denying it to others. The connection between this commonly debated question and our present question
has thus been made clear.
We must ﬁrst see whether any sorts of feeling-experience are essentially intentional, and then whether other sorts of feeling-experience lack this property.
(a) Are there any intentional feelings?
Many experiences commonly classed as ‘feelings’ have an undeniable, real
relation to something objective. This is the case, e.g., when we are pleased
by a melody, displeased at a shrill blast etc. etc. It seems obvious, in general,
that every joy or sorrow, that is joy or sorrow about something we think of,
is a directed act. Instead of joy we can speak of pleased delight in something, instead of sorrow we can speak of displeased or painful dislike of it,
aversion from it etc. etc.
Those who question the intentionality of feeling say: Feelings are mere
states, not acts, intentions. Where they relate to objects, they owe their
relation to a complication with presentations.
No intrinsic objection is involved in this last position. Brentano who
defends the intentionality of feelings, also maintains without inconsistency
that feelings, like all acts that are not themselves presentations, have presentations as their foundations.20 We can only direct ourselves feelingly to objects that are presented to us by inwoven presentations. No difference emerges
between the disputing parties until someone is really prepared to maintain
that feeling, considered in itself, involves nothing intentional, that it does
not point beyond itself to a felt object, that only its union with a presentation gives it a certain relation to an object, a relation only intentional by
way of this connection and not intrinsically so. This is just what the other
party disputes.
Brentano thinks we have here two intentions built on one another: the
underlying, founding intention gives us the presented object, the founded
intention the felt object. The former is separable from the latter, the latter
inseparable from the former. His opponents think there is only one intention
here, the presenting one.
If we subject the situation to a careful phenomenological review, Brentano’s
conception seems deﬁnitely to be preferred. Whether we turn with pleasure
to something, or whether its unpleasantness repels us, an object is presented.

Consciousness as intentional experience 225

But we do not merely have a presentation, with an added feeling associatively tacked on to it, and not intrinsically related to it, but pleasure or
distaste direct themselves to the presented object, and could not exist without such a direction. If two psychical experiences, e.g. two presentations, are
associated in an objective-psychological sense, there is a phenomenologically
discernible type of associative unity among the reproduced experiences
which corresponds to the objective dispositions which govern them. Side by
side with the intentional elation which each has to its object, there is also a
phenomenological mode of connection: one idea, e.g. that of Naples, carries
with it the idea of Vesuvius, the one is peculiarly bound up with the other,
so that we say in regard to the objects presented – the mode of their presentation here essentially requires further description – that the one reminds us
of the other. (This sentence is being used to express a phenomenological
situation.) It is easily seen, however, that though all this in a sense constitutes a new intentional relationship, it does not turn each associated
member into an object of the other’s intention. The intentional relationships
remain unconfused in their association. How indeed could they furnish an
object, borrowed from an associated intention, to something not itself
intentional? It is clear, further, that such a phenomenologically associative
relation is extrinsic, not at all to be put on a level with the relation of
pleasure to the pleasant. The presentation which reproduces is quite possible
without such a reproductive function. But pleasure without anything pleasant is unthinkable. And it is unthinkable, not because we are here dealing
with correlative expressions, as when we say, e.g., that a cause without an
effect, or a father without a child, is unthinkable, but because the speciﬁc
essence of pleasure demands a relation to something pleasing. Just so the
feature known as conviction is unthinkable apart from something of which
we are convinced. There is, similarly, no desire whose speciﬁc character can
do without something desired, no agreement or approval without something
agreed on or approved etc. etc. These are all intentions, genuine acts in our
sense. They all ‘owe’ their intentional relation to certain underlying presentations. But it is part of what we mean by such ‘owing’ that they themselves
really now have what they owe to something else.
It is plain, too, that the relation between founding (underlying) presentation and founded act cannot be correctly described by saying that the former
produces the latter. We say that the object arouses our pleasure, just as we
say in other cases that some circumstance inspires doubt, compels agreement, provokes desire etc. But the result of such apparent causation, the
pleasure, doubt or agreement provoked, is itself through and through intentional. We are not dealing with an external causal relation where the effect
conceivably could be what it intrinsically is without the cause, or where the
cause brings something forth that could have existed independently.
Closer consideration shows it to be absurd in principle, here or in like
cases, to treat an intentional as a causal relation, to give it the sense of an

226 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

empirical, substantial-causal case of necessary connection. For the intentional object, here thought of as ‘ provocative’, is only in question as an
intentional, not as an external reality, which really and psycho-physically
determines my mental life. A battle of centaurs, seen in a picture or framed
in fancy, ‘provokes’ my approval just like some beautiful, real landscape:
if I look on the latter psycho-physically as the real cause of my mentally
provoked state of pleasure, this ‘causation’ is altogether different from the
causation we have when we see the visible landscape – in virtue of such
and such a mode of appearing and such and such pictured colours and
forms – as the ‘source’, ‘ground’ or ‘cause’ of my pleasure. Pleasantness or
pleasure do not belong as effect to this landscape considered as a physical
reality, but only to it as appearing in this or that manner, perhaps as thus
and thus judged of or as reminding us of this or that, in the conscious act
here in question: it is as such that the landscape ‘demands’, ‘arouses’ such
feelings.21
(b) Are there non-intentional feelings? Distinction between
feeling-sensations and feeling-acts
We may now ask more generally whether, in addition to the intentional
varieties of feeling, there are not other non-intentional species. It may seem
at ﬁrst that an obvious ‘Yes’ is the right answer. In the wide ﬁeld of socalled sensory feelings, no intentional characters can be found. The sensible
pain of a burn can certainly not be classed beside a conviction, a surmise, a
volition etc. etc., but beside sensory contents like rough or smooth, red or
blue etc. If we recall such pains, or any sensory pleasures (the fragrance of a
rose, the relish of certain foods etc. etc.), we ﬁnd that our sensory feelings
are blended with the sensations from the various sense-ﬁelds, just as these
latter are blended with one another.
Every sensory feeling, e.g. the pain of burning oneself or of being burnt,
is no doubt after a fashion referred to an object: it is referred, on the one
hand, to the ego and its burnt bodily member, on the other hand, to the
object which inﬂicts the burn. In all these respects there is conformity with
other sensations: tactual sensations, e.g., are referred in just this manner to
the bodily member which touches, and to the external body which is touched.
And though this reference is realized in intentional experiences, no one
would think of calling the referred sensations intentional. It is rather the
case that our sensations are here functioning as presentative contents in
perceptual acts, or (to use a possibly misleading phrase) that our sensations
here receive an objective ‘interpretation’ or ‘taking-up’. They themselves are
not acts, but acts are constituted through them, wherever, that is, intentional characters like a perceptual interpretation lay hold of them, and as it
were animate them. In just this manner it seems that a burning, piercing,
boring pain, fused as it is from the start with certain tactual sensations, must

Consciousness as intentional experience 227

itself count as a sensation. It functions at least as other sensations do, in
providing a foothold for empirical, objective interpretations.
All this seems unobjectionable, and the whole question disposed of. We
seem to have shown that some feelings are to he reckoned among intentional
experiences, while others are non-intentional.
But we are led to doubt, then, whether two such sorts of ‘feelings’ really
form a single class. We spoke previously of ‘feelings’ of liking and dislike, of
approval and disapproval, of valuation and disvaluation – experiences obviously akin to theoretical acts of assent and rejection, of taking something
to be probable or improbable, or to deliberative acts of judgemental or voluntary decision etc. Here we have a kind, a plain unity of essence, which
included nothing but acts, where such sensations of pain and pleasure have
no place: descriptively the latter belong, in virtue of their speciﬁc essence,
among tactual, gustatory, olfactory and other sensations. Being at best presentative contents of objects of intention, but not themselves intentions,
they manifest descriptive differences so essential, that we cannot seriously
believe in the unity of a genuine class. In both cases of course, we speak of
‘feelings’, i.e. in the case of the above-mentioned acts of liking as in the case
of the above-mentioned sensations. This fact need not perplex, any more
than our ordinary talk of ‘feeling’, in the sense of touching, need lead us
astray in the case of tactile sensations.
Brentano has already pointed to the ambiguity here dealt with, in discussing the intentionality of feelings. He draws a distinction, in sense if not in
words, between sensations of pain and pleasure (feeling-sensations) and pain
and pleasure in the sense of feelings. The contents of the former – or, as
I should simply say, the former22 – are in this terminology ‘physical’, while
the latter are ‘psychical phenomena’, and they belong therefore to essentially different genera. This notion I regard as quite correct, but only doubt,
whether the meaning of the word ‘feeling’ does not lean predominantly
towards ‘feeling-sensation’, and whether the many acts we call ‘feelings’ do
not owe their name to the feeling-sensations with which they are essentially
interwoven. One must of course not mix up questions of suitable terminology
with questions regarding the factual correctness of Brentano’s distinction.
Our distinction should constantly be kept in mind and fruitfully applied
in analysing all complexes of feeling-sensations and feeling-acts. Joy, e.g.,
concerning some happy event, is certainly an act. But this act, which is not
merely an intentional character, but a concrete and therefore complex experience, does not merely hold in its unity an idea of the happy event and an
act-character of liking which relates to it: a sensation of pleasure attaches to
the idea, a sensation at once seen and located as an emotional excitement in
the psycho-physical feeling-subject, and also as an objective property – the
event seems as if bathed in a rosy gleam. The event thus pleasingly painted
now serves as the ﬁrst foundation for the joyful approach, the liking for,
the being charmed, or however one’s state may be described. A sad event,

228 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

likewise, is not merely seen in its thinglike content and context, in the respects which make it an event: it seems clothed and coloured with sadness.
The same unpleasing sensations which the empirical ego refers to and locates
in itself – the pang in the heart – are referred in one’s emotional conception
to the thing itself. These relations are purely presentational: we ﬁrst have an
essentially new type of intention in hostile repugnance, in active dislike etc.
Sensations of pleasure and pain may continue, though the act-characters
built upon them may lapse. When the facts which provoke pleasure sink
into the background, are no longer apperceived as emotionally coloured,
and perhaps cease to be intentional objects at all, the pleasurable excitement
may linger on for a while: it may itself be felt as agreeable. Instead of
representing a pleasant property of the object, it is referred merely to the
feeling-subject, or is itself presented and pleases.
Much the same holds in the sphere of desire and volition.23 If difﬁculty
is felt in the fact that desire does not always seem to require conscious
reference to what is desired, that we are often moved by obscure drives or
pressures towards unrepresented goals, and if one points especially to the
wide sphere of natural instinct, where goal-consciousness is at least absent
at the start, one may say: This is a case of mere sensations – we may speak
analogically of ‘desire-sensations’ – without needing to afﬁrm the existence
of an essentially new class of sensations – i.e. of experiences really lacking
intentional reference, and so also remote in kind from the essential character of intentional desire. Alternatively one may say: Here we are dealing
with intentional experiences, but with such as are characterized by indeterminateness of objective direction, an ‘indeterminateness’ which does
not amount to a privation, but which stands for a descriptive character of
one’s presentation. The idea we have when ‘something’ stirs, when there is
a rustling, a ring at the door, etc., an idea had before we give it verbal
expression, has indeterminateness of direction, and this indeterminateness is
of the intention’s essence, it is determined as presenting an indeterminate
‘something’.
Our one concept of desire might ﬁt many cases, and our other concept
others, and we might have to allow, not a relation of generic community
between intentional and non-intentional urges or desires, but one of mere
equivocation.
We must observe, also, that our classiﬁcation is oriented to the concretely
complex, and that the total character of such unities may at one time seem
to depend on sensational features (e.g. pleasure on urge-sensations), at
another on act-intentions which rest on these. The formation and use of
our expressions will at times therefore point to sensory contents, at times to
act-intentions, so giving rise to the equivocations in question.
Additional Note. The obvious tendency of our conception is to attribute
primary, genuine differences in intensity to underlying sensations, and to
concrete acts only in a secondary manner, in so far as their concrete total

Consciousness as intentional experience 229

character involves differences of intensity in their sensational basis. Actintentions, the inseparable aspects which give acts their essential distinctive
peculiarities, or which characterize them severally as judgements, feelings
etc., must be without intrinsic intensity. Deeper analyses are, however, required here.

§16 Distinction between descriptive and
intentional content
We have buttressed our notion of the essence of acts against objection, and
given them a generic unity of essence in their character as intentions, as consciousnesses in the unique descriptive sense. We now introduce an important
phenomenological distinction, obvious after our previous discussions, between
the real (reellen)24 and the intentional content of an act.
By the real phenomenological content of an act we mean the sum total of
its concrete or abstract parts, in other words, the sum total of the partial
experiences that really constitute it. To point out and describe such parts
is the task of pure descriptive psychological analysis operating from an
empirical, natural-scientiﬁc point of view. Such analysis is in all cases concerned to dismember what we inwardly experience as it in itself is, and as it
is really (reell) given in experience, without regard either to genetic connections, or to extrinsic meaning and valid application. Purely descriptive
psychological analysis of an articulated sound-pattern ﬁnds only sounds
and abstract parts or unifying forms of sounds, it ﬁnds no sound-vibrations
or organs of hearing etc.; it also never ﬁnds anything that resembles the ideal
sense that makes the sound-pattern to be a name, nor the person to whom
the name may apply. Our example sufﬁces to make our intention clear. The
real (reell) contents of acts are of course only known through descriptive analyses of this kind. That obscurities of intuition or inadequacies of
descriptive conception – faults, in short, of method – may lead to much
‘manufacture’ of sensations (to use Volkelt’s phrase) cannot be denied.
This, however, only concerns the legitimacy of particular cases of descriptive
analysis. It is clear, if anything is clear, that intentional experiences contain
distinguishable parts and aspects, and this alone is of importance here.
Let us now shift from our natural-scientiﬁc, psychological standpoint to
an ideal-scientiﬁc, phenomenological one. We must exclude all empirical
interpretations and existential afﬁrmations, we must take what is inwardly
experienced or otherwise inwardly intuited (e.g. in pure fancy) as pure
experiences, as our exemplary basis for acts of Ideation. We must ideate universal essences and essential connections in such experiences – ideal Species
of experiencing of differing levels of generality, and ideally valid truths of
essence which apply a priori, and with unlimited generality, to possible experiences of these species. We thus achieve insights in a pure phenomenology
which is here oriented to real (reellen) constituents, whose descriptions are

230 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

in every way ‘ideal’ and free from ‘experience’, i.e. from presupposition of
real existence. When we speak simply of the real (reellen), and in general
of the phenomenological analysis and description of experiences, the tie-up
of our discussions to psychological material is (we must keep on stressing)
merely transitional, since none of its empirically real (reellen) conceptions
and assertions of existence (e.g. of experiences as states of animal beings
having experiences in a real (realen), space-time world) are at all operative,
that pure phenomenological validity of essence is aimed at and claimed.25
Content in the real (reellen) sense is the mere application of the most
general notion of content, valid in all ﬁelds to intentional experiences. If
we now oppose intentional 26 to real (reell) content, the word shows that the
peculiarity of intentional experiences (or acts) is now in question. Here,
however, there are several concepts, all grounded in the speciﬁc nature of
acts, which may be equally covered by the rubric ‘intentional content’, and
are often so covered. We shall ﬁrst have to distinguish three concepts of the
intentional content: the intentional object of the act, its intentional material
(as opposed to its intentional quality) and, lastly its intentional essence. These
distinctions will become familiar in the course of the following very general
analyses, which are also essential to the more restricted aim of clarifying the
essence of knowledge.

§17 The intentional content in the sense of the
intentional object
Our ﬁrst concept of intentional content needs no elaborate preliminaries.
It concerns the intentional object, e.g. a house when a house is presented.
That the intentional object does not generally fall within the real (reellen) content of an act, but rather differs completely from this, has been already
discussed. This is not only true of acts pointing intentionally to ‘outer’ things;
it is also true in part of acts that point to our own present experiences, as
when I speak of, e.g., my actually present, but ‘background’ conscious experiences. Partial coincidence is only found where an intuition actually points
to something ‘lived through’ in the intentional act itself, as, e.g., in acts of
adequate perception.
We must distinguish, in relation to the intentional content taken as object
of the act, between the object as it is intended, and the object (period) which
is intended. In each act an object is presented as determined in this or that
manner, and as such it may be the target of varying intentions, judgemental,
emotional, desiderative etc. Known connections, actual or possible, entirely
external to the reality of the act, may be so cemented with it in intentional
unity as to be held to attribute objective properties to the same presented
object, properties not in the scope of the intention in question. Many new
presentations may arise, all claiming, in virtue of an objective unity of knowledge, to be presenting the same object. In all of them the object which we

Consciousness as intentional experience 231

intend is the same, but in each our intention differs, each means the object
in a different way. The idea, e.g., of the German Emperor, presents its
object as an Emperor, and as the Emperor of Germany. The man himself is
the son of the Emperor Frederick III, the grandson of Queen Victoria, and
has many other properties neither named nor presented. One can therefore
quite consistently speak of the intentional and extra-intentional content of
the object of some presentation, and one can use many other suitable, nontechnical expressions, e.g. what we intend in the object, that would not lead
to misunderstandings.
Another, yet more important, distinction goes with the distinction just
drawn, that between the objective reference of the act, taken in its entirety,
and the objects to which its various partial, constituent acts refer. Each act
has its own appropriate, intentional, objective reference: this is as true of
complex as of simple acts. Whatever the composition of an act out of partial
acts way be, if it is an act at all, it must have a single objective correlate, to
which we say it is ‘directed’, in the full, primary sense of the world. Its
partial acts (if they really are acts entering the complex act as parts, and not
mere parts of this act) likewise point to objects, which will, in general, not be
the same as the object of the whole act, though they may occasionally be the
same. In a secondary sense, no doubt, the whole act may be said to refer to
these objects also, but its intention only terminates on them inasmuch as its
constituent acts primarily intend them. Or, seen from the other side, they
are only the act’s objects in so far as they help to make up its true object, in
the manner in which this is intended. They function as terms of relations in
which the primary object is seen as the correlated term. The act, e.g., corresponding to the name ‘the knife on the table’ is plainly complex: the object of
the whole act is a knife, of one of its part-acts, a table. But, as the whole
nominal act refers to the knife as on the table, presents it in this relative
position to the latter, one can say that the table is in a secondary sense an
intentional object of the whole act. Again, to illustrate another important
class of cases, the knife is the object about which we judge or make a
statement, when we say that the knife is on the table; the knife is not,
however, the primary or full object of the judgement, but only the object of
its subject. The full and entire object corresponding to the whole judgement
is the state of affairs judged: the same state of affairs is presented in a mere
presentation, wished in a wish, asked after in a question, doubted in a doubt
etc. The wish that the knife were on the table, which coincides (in object)
with the judgement, is concerned with the knife, but we don’t in it wish the
knife, but that the knife should be on the table, that this should be so. The
state of affairs must obviously not be confused with the judging of it, nor
with the presentation of this judgement: I plainly do not wish for a judgement, nor for any presentation. Just so there is a corresponding question
regarding the knife, but the knife is not (nonsensically) what we ask; we ask
regarding the knife’s position on the table, whether this actually is the case.

232 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

So much for the ﬁrst sense in which we speak of intentional contents. Since
such talk is so highly ambiguous, we shall do well never to speak of an intentional content where an intentional object is meant, but to call the latter the
intentional object of the act in question.

§18 Simple and complex, founding and founded acts
We have so far only learnt to attach one meaning to the term ‘intentional
contents’. Further meanings will develop in our ensuing investigations, where
we shall attempt to seize on certain important peculiarities of the phenomenological essence of acts, and to throw light on the ideal unities rooted in these.
We start with the difference, previously noted, between simple and compound acts. Not every unitary experience compounded out of acts is for
that reason a compound act, just as every concatenation of machines is not a
compound machine. Our comparison illuminates our further requirements.
A compound machine is a machine compounded out of machines, but so
compounded, that it has a total performance into which the performances
of the partial machines ﬂow, and the like is the case in regard to compounded acts. Each partial act has its particular intentional reference, each
its unitary object, and its way of referring to it. These manifold part-acts
are, however, summed up in one total act, whose total achievement lies in
the unity of its intentional reference. To this the individual acts contribute
their individual performances: the unity of what is objectively presented,
and the whole manner of the intentional reference to it, are not set up
alongside of the partial acts, but in them, in the way in which they are
combined, a way which realizes a unity of act, and not merely a unity of
experience. The object of this total act could not appear as it does, unless
the partial acts presented their objects in their fashion: their general function is to present parts, or to present externally related terms, or to present
relational forms of the object etc. The same is true of the non-presentative
aspects of the act that make out of the uniﬁed qualities in the partial acts
the quality of whole acts, and so determine the speciﬁcally different ways
in which the objects concerned in either sort of act are ‘taken up into
consciousness’.
We may take as an example the unity of categorical or hypothetical predication, where the total acts are plainly put together out of partial acts. The
subject-member of a categorical assertion is an underlying act, a positing of
a subject, on which the positing of a predicate, its attribution or denial,
reposes. Just so the antecedent of a hypothetical assertion is constituent in
a clearly demarcated part-act, upon which the conditional assertion is built.
The total experience is in each case plainly one act, one judgement, whose
single, total object is a single state of affairs. As the judgement does not
exist alongside of, or between, the subject-positing and the predicating acts,
but exists in them as their dominant unity, so, on the correlative side, the

Consciousness as intentional experience 233

objective unity is the state of affairs judged, an appearance emergent out of
subject and predicate, or out of antecedent and consequent.
The situation may be yet more complex. On such a structured act (whose
members may themselves be further structured) a new act may be built, e.g.
a joy may be built on the assertion of a state of affairs, a joy in that state of
affairs. The joy is not a concrete act in its own right, and the judgement an
act set up beside it: the judgement rather underlies the joy, ﬁxes its content,
realizes its abstract possibility for, without some such foundation, there
could be no joy at all.27 Judgements may similarly serve as foundations for
surmises, doubts, questions, wishes, acts of will etc., and the latter acts may
likewise serve to found other acts in their turn. There are therefore manifold
ways in which acts may be combined into total acts. The briefest consideration makes plain that there are deep differences in the ways in which acts are
concretely woven into other acts, or based upon underlying acts, and made
possible by such concretion: the systematic investigation of such ways, even
in descriptive, psychological fashion, is as yet hardly in its beginnings.

§20 The difference between the quality and the
matter of an act
We now turn from the distinction between the acts in which we ‘live’ and
the acts which proceed ‘on the side’, to another extremely important,
seemingly plain distinction lying in a quite different direction. This is the
distinction between the general act-character, which stamps an act as merely
presentative, judgemental, emotional, desiderative etc., and its ‘content’ which
stamps it as presenting this, as judging that etc. etc. The two assertions
‘2 × 2 = 4’ and ‘Ibsen is the principal founder of modern dramatic realism’,
are both, qua assertions, of one kind; each is qualiﬁed as an assertion, and
their common feature is their judgement-quality. The one, however, judges
one content and the other another content. To distinguish such ‘contents’
from other notions of ‘content’ we shall speak here of the matter (material) of
judgements. We shall draw similar distinctions between quality and matter
in the case of all acts.
Under the rubric of ‘matter’ we shall not divide, and then reassemble in
unity, constituents of an act such as the subject-act, the predicate-act etc.:
this would make the uniﬁed total content the act itself. What we here have
in mind is something totally different. Content in the sense of ‘matter’ is a
component of the concrete act-experience, which it may share with acts of
quite different quality. It comes out most clearly if we set up a series of
identical utterances, where the act-qualities change, while the matter remains identical. All this is not hard to provide. We recall familiar talk to the
effect that the same content may now be the content of a mere presentation,
now of a judgement, now of a question, now of a doubt, a wish etc. etc. A
man who frames the presentation ‘There are intelligent beings on Mars’

234 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

frames the same presentation as the man who asserts ‘There are intelligent
beings on Mars’, and the same as the man who asks ‘Are there intelligent
beings on Mars?’, or the man who wishes ‘If only there are intelligent beings
on Mars!’ etc. etc. We have deliberately written out the closely correspondent expressions in full. To be alike in ‘content’, while differing in act-quality
has its visible grammatical expression; the harmony of grammatical forms
points the way to our analysis.
What do we mean by the ‘same content’? Plainly the intentional objectivity of the various acts is the same. One and the same state of affairs is
presented in the presentation, put as valid in the judgement, wished for in
the wish, asked about in the question. This observation does not, however, go far enough, as we shall now show. In real (reell) phenomenological
treatment, objectivity counts as nothing: in general, it transcends the act. It
makes no difference what sort of being we give our object, or with what sense
or justiﬁcation we do so, whether this being is real (real) or ideal, genuine,
possible or impossible, the act remains ‘directed upon’ its object. If one now
asks how something non-existent or transcendent can be the intentional
object in an act in which it has no being, one can only give the answer we
gave above, which is also a wholly sufﬁcient one. The object is an intentional object: this means there is an act having a determinate intention,
and determinate in a way which makes it an intention towards this object.
This ‘reference to an object’ belongs peculiarly and intrinsically to an actexperience, and the experiences manifesting it are by deﬁnition intentional
experiences or acts.28 All differences in mode of objective reference are descriptive differences in intentional experiences.
We must note, however, that this peculiarity revealed in the phenomenological essence of acts, of directing themselves to a certain object and not
another, will not exhaust the phenomenological essence in question. We
spoke of differences in mode of objective reference, but this lumps together
totally distinct, independently variable differences. Some are differences in
act-quality, as when we speak of such different ways of being intentional as
being presented, being judged, being asked etc. Such variation intersects
with the other, wholly independent variation in objective reference: one act
may point to this, another to that object, regardless as to whether the acts
are alike or different in quality. Every quality can be combined with every
objective reference. This second variation therefore points to a second side in
the phenomenological content of acts, differing from their quality.
In the case of this latter variation, which concerns the changing direction
to objects, one does not speak of different ‘manners of objective reference’,
though the differentia of this direction lies in the act itself.
Looking more closely, we see another possibility of variation independent
of quality which certainly prompts talk of different ways of referring to
objects. We see, too, that the twofold variation just distinguished is not
quite in a position to effect a neat separation of what must be deﬁned as

Consciousness as intentional experience 235

‘matter’ from quality. Our distinction posited two sides in every act: its
quality, which stamped it as, e.g., presentation or judgement, and its matter,
that lent it direction to an object, which made a presentation, e.g., present
this object and no other. This is quite right, and yet is to some extent
misleading. For one is at ﬁrst tempted to interpret the situation simply:
matter is that part of an act which gives it direction to this object and no
other. Acts are therefore unambiguously determined by their quality, on
the one hand, and by the object they will intend, on the other. This seeming
obviousness is, however, delusive. One can readily see, in fact, that even if
quality and objective direction are both ﬁxed at the same time, certain variations remain possible. Two identically qualiﬁed acts, e.g. two presentations,
may appear directed, and evidently directed, to the same object, without
full agreement in intentional essence. The ideas equilateral triangle and equiangular triangle differ in content, though both are directed, and evidently
directed, to the same object: they present the same object, although ‘in a
different fashion’. The same is true of such presentations as a length of a + b
units and a length of b + a units; it is also true of statements, in other respects
synonymous, which differ only in ‘equivalent’ concepts. The same holds if
we compare other types of equivalent assertions, e.g. We shall have rain and
The weather is becoming rainy. If we consider a series of acts like the judgement It will rain today, the surmise It may well rain today, the question Will
it rain today? and the wish Oh that it would rain today!, we see that it
exempliﬁed identity not only as regards objective reference in general, but
also as regards a new sense of objective reference, a sense not ﬁxed by the
quality of the act.
Quality only determines whether what is already presented in deﬁnite fashion is intentionally present as wished, asked, posited in judgement etc. The
matter, therefore, must be that element in an act which ﬁrst gives it reference
to an object, and reference so wholly deﬁnite that it not merely ﬁxes the object
meant in a general way, but also the precise way in which it is meant.29 The
matter – to carry clearness a little further – is that peculiar side of an act’s
phenomenological content that not only determines that it grasps the object
but also as what it grasps it, the properties, relations, categorial forms, that
it itself attributes to it. It is the act’s matter that makes its object count as
this object and no other, it is the objective, the interpretative sense (Sinn der
gegenständlichen Auffassung, Auffassungssinn) which serves as basis for
the act’s quality (while indifferent to such qualitative differences). Identical
matters can never yield distinct objective references, as the above examples
prove. Differences of equivalent, but not tautologically equivalent expressions, certainly affect matter. Such differences must not be thought to correspond to any fragmentation of matter: there is not one piece of matter
corresponding to an identical object, another to the differing mode of presenting it. Reference to objects is possible a priori only as being a deﬁnite
manner of reference: it arises only if the matter is fully determined.

236 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

To this we may add an observation: act-quality is undoubtedly an abstract aspect of acts, unthinkable apart from all matter. Could we hold an
experience possible which was a judging without deﬁnite subject-matter?
This would take from the judgement its character as intentional experience,
which is evidently part of its essence.
The same holds of matter. A matter that was not matter for presentation,
nor for judgement, nor for . . . etc. etc., would be held to be unthinkable.
Talk about the manner of objective reference is ambiguous: at times it
points to differences of quality, at times to differences of matter. We shall
henceforth counteract such ambiguity by suitable locutions involving the
terms ‘quality’ and ‘matter’. That such talk has yet other important meanings will appear in due course. [Cf. the enumeration in Inv VI, §27 below.]

§21 The intentional and the semantic essence
We shall postpone investigation of the difﬁcult problems here involved, to
treat of a new distinction, in which a new concept of intentional content arises,
which has to be separated off from the full descriptive content of the act.
In each act’s descriptive content we have distinguished quality and matter
as two mutually dependent aspects. If both are taken together, it would at
ﬁrst seem, the act in question will merely have been reconstituted. Looked at
more closely, however, another conception distinguishes itself from whose
point of view the two aspects, brought to unity, do not make up the concrete,
complete act. Two acts may in fact agree in respect of their quality and their
matter, and yet differ descriptively. In so far as quality and matter now
count for us (as will be shown later) as the wholly essential, and so never to
be dispensed with, constituents of an act, it would be suitable to call the
union of both, forming one part of the complete act, the act’s intentional
essence. To pin down this term, and the conception of the matter it goes
with, we simultaneously introduce a second term. To the extent that we deal
with acts, functioning in expressions in sense-giving fashion, or capable of
so functioning – whether all acts are so capable must be considered later –
we shall speak more speciﬁcally of the semantic essence of the act. The
ideational abstraction of this essence yields a ‘meaning’ in our ideal sense.
In justiﬁcation of our conceptual ruling, we may point to the following
new series of identiﬁcations. We may say generally, and with good sense,
that a man may, at different times, and that several men may, at the same or
different times, have the same presentation, memory, expectation, perception, utter the same assertion or wish, cherish the same hope etc. etc.30
To have the same presentation means, but does not mean as much as,
having a presentation of the same object. The presentation I have of Greenland’s icy wastes certainly differs from the presentation Nansen has of it,
yet the object is the same. Just so the ideal objects straight line and shortest
line are identical, but the presentations – ‘straight’ being suitably deﬁned –
different.

Consciousness as intentional experience 237

Talk about the same presentation, judgement etc. points to no individual
sameness of acts, as if my consciousness were in some way conjoined with
someone else’s. It also means no relation of perfect likeness, of indiscernibility
as regards inner constituents, as if the one act merely duplicated the other.
We have the same presentation of a thing, when we have presentations in
which the thing is not merely presented, but presented as exactly the same:
following our previous treatment we may add ‘presented with the same
interpretative sense’ or ‘based on the same matter’. In our ‘essence’ we really
have the same presentation despite other phenomenological differences. Such
essential identity comes out most clearly when we reﬂect how presentations
function in forming higher acts. For essential identity can be equivalently
deﬁned if we say: Two presentations are in essence the same, if exactly the
same statements, and no others, can be made on the basis of either regarding the presented thing (either presentation being taken alone, i.e. analytically). The same holds in regard to other species of acts. Two judgements
are essentially the same judgement when (in virtue of their content alone)
everything that the one judgement tells us of the state of affairs judged,
would also be told us by the other, and nothing more is told us by either.
Their truth-value is identical, and this is clear to us when ‘the’ judgement,
the intentional essence uniting judgement-quality and judgement-matter, is
the same.
Let us now be quite clear that the intentional essence does not exhaust the
act phenomenologically. An imaginative presentation, qualiﬁed as merely
imaginative, is unessentially altered in manner, if the fullness and vividness
of the sensuous contents helping to build it up is increased or decreased, or,
objectively put, if the object now appears with greater clearness and deﬁniteness, now becomes lost in a mist, now becomes paler in colour etc. Whether
or not one here assumes intensive differences, whether one concedes or
denies a basic likeness between the sensory phantasms here present and the
sensational elements in perception, all this makes little difference to the
absolute qualities, forms etc. of the act, in so far as the act’s intention, its
meaning, stays unchanged, identically determined (identity of matter). We
attribute these changes, not to the object, but to its ‘appearance’; we ‘mean’
the object as constant and persistent, and we ‘mean’ this in merely ‘feigning’
fashion (identity of quality). As opposed to this, the matter of a unitary presentation changes if its object is given as changing (despite any overreaching
form of unity to which the intentional object’s identity-in-variety corresponds).
The same is true when new features enrich our conception of an object,
which is constantly before consciousness, features not previously part of the
object’s intentional content, of the object of our presentation as such.
The case of perception is similar. If many persons share the ‘same’ percept, or repeat a previous one, we have merely an identity of matter, of
intentional essence, which does not at all exclude change in the descriptive
content of the experience. The same holds of the variable part played, or that
can be played, by imagination in perception, in the putting of a perceived

238 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

object before us. Whether or not images of the back of the cigarette-box
ﬂoat in front of me, with this or that degree of fulness, steadiness and
vividness, is quite irrelevant to the essential content, the interpretative sense
of my percept, to that side of it, in short which, suitably understood, explains and justiﬁes talk of the ‘same percept’ in opposition to a multiplicity
of phenomenologically distinct perceptual acts. In each of such cases the
object is presupposed as identical, is seen clothed with the same array of
properties: it is ‘meant’ or ‘apprehended’ and posited in perceptual fashion.
A percept may, further, have the same matter as a ﬂight of fancy: the
latter may present an object or state of affairs in imagination as being ‘just
the same’ as it is perceptually apprehended in the percept. Nothing may be
objectively ascribed in the one case which is not likewise ascribed in the
other. Since the quality of the presentation may be identical (e.g. in the case
of memory), we see that the speciﬁc differences of intuitive acts do not
depend on their intentional essence.
Much the same may be said of any sort of act. Many persons cherish the
same wish, when their optative intention is the same. This wish may in one
person be fully expressed, in another unexpressed, in one person it may
bring to full intuitive clarity its basic presentative content, in another it may
be more or less ‘notional’ etc. In each case the identity of essence plainly lies
in the two aspects distinguished above, in an identity of act-quality and of
matter. The same may be claimed for expressive acts, for the acts in particular which lend meaning to expressions: as said above by anticipation, their
semantic essence, i.e. the really present (reell) phenomenological correlate of
their meaning, coincides with their intentional essence.
We may conﬁrm our notion of semantic essence (the act of meaning in
concreto) by recalling the series of identities used above in Investigation 
(§12) in order to draw a distinction between a unity of meaning and a unity
of object, and the numerous examples of expressive experience which there
illustrated our general notion of intentional essence. The identity of ‘the’
judgement or of ‘the’ statement consists in an identity of meaning repeated
as the same in the many individual acts, and represented in them by their
semantic essence. This leaves room for important descriptive difference in
regard to other constituents of these acts, as we have pointed out in detail.31

Appendix to §11 and §20
Critique of the ‘image-theory’ and of the doctrine of the
‘immanent’ objects of acts
There are two fundamental, well-nigh ineradicable errors that have to be
guarded against in the phenomenological interpretation of the relationship
between act and subject:

Consciousness as intentional experience 239

1. The erroneous image-theory, which thinks it has sufﬁciently explained
the fact of presentation – fully present in each act – by saying that: ‘Outside
the thing itself is there (or is at times there); in consciousness there is an
image which does duty for it.’
To this notion we must object that it entirely ignores a most weighty
point: that in a representation by images the represented object (the original)
is meant, and meant by way of its image as an apparent object. This representative character is, however, no ‘real predicate’, no intrinsic character of
the object which functions as image: an object is not representative as, e.g.,
it is red and spherical. What therefore enables us to go beyond the image
which alone is present in consciousness, and to refer to the latter as an
image to a certain extraconscious object? To point to the resemblance between image and thing will not help. It is doubtless present, as an objective
matter-of-fact, when the thing actually exists. But for consciousness, which
is assumed only to possess the image,32 this fact means nothing: it can throw
no light on the essence of the representative relation to the object, to the
original, which is external to itself. Resemblance between two objects, however precise, does not make the one be an image of the other. Only a presenting ego’s power to use a similar as an image-representative of a similar
– the ﬁrst similar had intuitively, while the second similar is nonetheless
meant in its place – makes the image be an image. This can only mean that
the constitution of the image as image takes place in a peculiar intentional
consciousness, whose inner character, whose speciﬁcally peculiar mode of
apperception, not only constitutes what we call image-representation as
such, but also, through its particular inner determinateness, constitutes the
image-representation of this or that deﬁnite object. The reﬂective, relational
opposition of image to original does not, however, point to two genuinely
apparent objects in the imaginative act itself, but rather to possible cognitive
consummations, which new acts must realize, both fulﬁlling the imaginal
intention and achieving a synthesis between the image and the thing it represents. Inaccurate oppositions of inner likenesses to outer objects cannot be
allowed in a descriptive psychology, and much less in a pure phenomenology. A painting only is a likeness for a likeness-constituting consciousness,
whose imaginative apperception, basing itself on a percept, ﬁrst gives to its
primary, perceptually apparent object the status and meaning of an image.
Since the interpretation of anything as an image presupposes an object
intentionally given to consciousness, we should plainly have a regressus in
inﬁnitum were we again to let this latter object be itself constituted through
an image, or to speak seriously of a ‘perceptual image’ immanent in a simple
percept, by way of which it refers to the ‘thing itself’. We must come to see,
moreover, the general need for a constitution of presented objects for and in
consciousness, in consciousness’s own circle of essential being. We must
realize that a transcendent object is not present to consciousness merely
because a content rather similar to it simply somehow is in consciousness –

240 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

a supposition which, fully thought out, reduces to utter nonsense – but that
all relation to an object is part and parcel of the phenomenological essence
of consciousness, and can in principle be found in nothing else, even when
such a relation points to some ‘transcendent’ matter. This pointing is ‘direct’
in the case of a straightforward presentation: it is mediate in the case of a
‘founded’ presentation, e.g. one by way of images.
One should not talk and think as if an image stood in the same relation to
consciousness as a statue does to a room in which it is set up, or as if the
least light could be shed on the matter by inventing a hotch-potch of two
objects. One must rise to the fundamental insight that one can only achieve
the understanding one wants through a phenomenological analysis of the
essences of the acts concerned, which are acts of the ‘imagination’ in the
wide, traditional sense of Kant and Hume. The essential and a priori peculiarity of such acts consists in the fact that in them ‘an object appears’,
sometimes straightforwardly and directly, and sometimes as ‘counting’ as a
‘representation by images’ of an object that resembles it. Here we must not
forget that the representative image, like any apparent object, is itself constituted in an act in which the prime source of its representative character is
to be sought.
Our exposition extends, mutatis mutandis, to the theory of representation
in the wider sense of a theory of signs. To be a sign, likewise, is no real (real)
predicate; it requires a founded conscious act, a reference to certain novel
characters of acts, which are all that is phenomenologically relevant and, in
consequence of this last predicate, all that is really (reell) phenomenological.
2. It is a serious error to draw a real (reell) distinction between ‘merely
immanent’ or ‘intentional’ objects, on the one hand, and ‘transcendent’,
‘actual’ objects, which may correspond to them on the other. It is an error
whether one makes the distinction one between a sign or image really (reell)
present in consciousness and the thing it stands for or images, or whether
one substitutes for the ‘immanent object’ some other real (reelles) datum of
consciousness, a content, e.g., as a sense-giving factor. Such errors have
dragged on through the centuries – one has only to think of Anselm’s ontological argument – they have their source in factual difﬁculties, but their
support lies in equivocal talk concerning ‘immanence’ and the like. It need
only be said to be acknowledged that the intentional object of a presentation
is the same as its actual object, and on occasion as its external object, and that
it is absurd to distinguish between them. The transcendent object would not
be the object of this presentation, if it was not its intentional object. This
is plainly a merely analytic proposition. The object of the presentation,
of the ‘intention’, is and means what is presented, the intentional object. If
I represent God to myself, or an angel, or an intelligible thing-in-itself,
or a physical thing or a round square etc., I mean the transcendent object
named in each case, in other words my intentional object: it makes no
difference whether this object exists or is imaginary or absurd. ‘The object is

Consciousness as intentional experience 241

merely intentional’ does not, of course, mean that it exists, but only in an
intention, of which it is a real (reelles) part, or that some shadow of it exists.
It means rather that the intention, the reference33 to an object so qualiﬁed,
exists, but not that the object does. If the intentional object exists, the
intention, the reference, does not exist alone, but the thing referred to exists
also. But enough of these truisms, which so many philosophers still manage
to obfuscate so completely.
What we have said above does not, of course, stop us from distinguishing,
as we said previously, between the object tout court which is intended on a
given occasion, and the object as it is then intended – what interpretative
slant is put upon it and with what possible fulness of intuition – and in the
latter case peculiar analyses and descriptions will be appropriate.

242 On intentional
experiences and their ‘contents’
Chapter
3

The matter of the act and
its underlying presentation

§22 The question of the relation between the matter
and quality of an act
We wind up our general probe into the phenomenological structure of intentional experience with a discussion which throws important light on the
main problems in our special ﬁeld of meaning. It deals with the relation of
quality to matter, and so with the sense in which each act both needs and
also includes in itself a presentation which serves as its basis. We here at
once come up against fundamental difﬁculties, scarce noticed before1 and
certainly not put into words. The gap in our phenomenological knowledge
is all the more grievous since, while it remains unﬁlled, we can have no real
insight into the essential make-up of intentional experiences, and none therefore into meanings.
Quality and matter were distinguished by us as two ‘moments’, two inner
constituents of all acts. We did so quite properly. If, e.g., we call an experience one of ‘judgement’, there must be some inner determination, not some
mere outwardly attached mark, that distinguishes it as a judgement from
wishes, hopes and other sorts of acts. This determination it shares with
all judgements: what distinguishes it from all other judgements (i.e. judgements other in essence) is above all its matter (disregarding certain other
‘moments’ to be investigated later). This matter also is an inner moment of
the act. This is not so much directly apparent – quality and matter are not
readily prised apart in the analysis of, e.g., an isolated judgement – but
appears when we set qualitatively different acts side by side, and compare
them in respect of certain correspondent identities, when we ﬁnd an identical matter as a moment common to them all, much as in the sensory realm
we come upon like intensities or colours. What we only have to ask is what
this identical element is and how it stands to the moment of quality. Are we
dealing with two separate albeit abstract constituents of acts, such as colour
and shape in sensuous intuition, or are they otherwise related, as, e.g., genus
and differentia etc.? This question is all the more weighty since the matter of
acts is that aspect of them which gives them their determinate objective

The matter of the act and its underlying presentation 243

reference. To be as clear as one can in regard to the nature of such reference is
of fundamental interest for epistemology, since all thinking takes place in acts.

§23 The view of ‘matter’ as a founding act of
‘mere presentation’
The ﬁrst answer to our question is furnished by the well-known proposition,
used among others by Brentano to circumscribe his ‘psychical phenomena’,
that each such phenomenon – in our terminology and deﬁnition each intentional experience – is either a presentation or based upon underlying presentations. More precisely, this remarkable proposition means that in each act
the intentional object is presented in an act of presentation, and that, whenever we have no case of ‘mere’ presentation, we have a case of presentation
so peculiarly and intimately inwoven with one or more further acts or rather
act-characters, that the presented objects become the object judged about,
wished for, hoped for etc. Such plurality of intentional reference is not
achieved in a linked concomitance or sequence of acts, in each of which the
object has a novel, i.e. a recurrent, intentional presence, but in a single
strictly unitary act, in which a single object is only once apparent, but is in
this single appearance the target of a complex intention. We can, in other
words, interpret our proposition as saying that an intentional experience
only gains objective reference by incorporating an experienced act of presentation in itself, through which the object is presented to it. The object
would be nothing to consciousness if consciousness did not set it before
itself as an object, and if it did not further permit the object to become an
object of feeling, of desire etc.
These added intentional characters are plainly not to be regarded as complete and independent acts: they cannot be conceived apart from the act of
objectifying presentation, on which they are accordingly based. That an
object or state of affairs should be desired, without being presented in and
with such desire, is not merely not the case in fact, but is entirely inconceivable, and the same holds in every similar case. The matter before us therefore claims to be a priori, and the proposition asserting it is a self-evident
law of essence. The addition of, e.g., desire to some underlying presentation,
is not the addition of something that exists independently, with its own
independent direction to some object: we must see it as the addition of a
non-independent factor, intentional no doubt as having real reference to an
object, and unthinkable a priori without it, but only able to develop or gain
such reference through intimate liaison with a presentation. But this last is
more than a mere act-quality: unlike the quality of desire based upon it, it is
quite capable of independent existence as a concrete intentional experience,
as an act of ‘mere’ presentation.
We round off these explanations with an observation which must be kept
in mind in future discussions: that among cases of ‘mere presentation’ we

244 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

must include, following Brentano, all cases of mere imagination, where the
apparent object has neither being nor non-being asserted of it, and where no
further acts concern it, as well as all cases where an expression, e.g. a statement, is well understood without prompting us either to belief or disbelief.
It is mainly by contrast with such a ‘belief-character’, whose addition perfects judgement, that the notion of mere presentation can be elucidated. It is
well-known how important a part this contrast plays in the modern theory
of judgement.
Returning to our proposition, we are tempted (as said at the beginning)
to apply the principle there expressed and here set forth, to explain the relation between matter and quality. Identity of matter accompanying change
of quality rests, we may say, on the ‘essential’ identity of the underlying
presentation. Or otherwise put: acts having the same ‘content’, and differing
only in intentional essence, inasmuch as one judges, one wishes, one doubts
etc., this same content, have ‘in essence’ the same presentation as their basis.
If this presentation underlies a judgement, it yields (in its present sense as
‘matter’) the content of a judgement. If it underlies a desire, it yields the
content of a desire etc. etc.
We spoke of ‘essentially the same presentation’. We are not to be taken
as saying that matter and underlying presentation are actually one and the
same, since ‘matter’ is merely an abstract ‘moment’ in an act. In talking of
‘essentially the same presentation’ we rather meant, following previous discussion, presentations with one and the same matter, which may, of course,
be phenomenologically differentiated by further ‘moments’ which have nothing to do with matter. Since quality is also the same, all these presentations
have the same ‘intentional essence’.
The following is the outcome: that, while every other intentional essence
is a complex of quality and matter, the intentional essence of a presentation
is pure matter – or is pure quality, however one may choose to call it.
Otherwise put, it is only because all other acts have a complex intentional
essence, and necessarily include a presentative factor among their essential
constituents, that talk of the difference between quality and matter arises.
The word ‘matter’ refers to the necessary, basic presentative constituent. In
the case of simple acts, which are also eo ipso presentative, the whole distinction necessarily falls away. One should then say: the difference between
quality and matter represents no basic difference among the kinds of abstract moments found in acts. Matters, treated in and for themselves, do not
differ from qualities: they are qualities of presentation. What we call the
intentional essence of an act is its total qualitative being: this is what is
essential to it, as opposed to what varies accidentally.
The matter could also be put in the following manner:
If an act is simple, i.e. is a pure presentation, its quality coincides with
what we have called its intentional essence. If it is complex – and all acts
that are not mere presentations, as well as all complex presentations, belong

The matter of the act and its underlying presentation 245

here – its complex intentional essence is merely a complex of qualities brought
together in unity, from which a unitary total quality emerges, in such a way,
however, that each primitive or complex quality in the pattern, which is not
itself a presentative quality, rests upon such a presentative quality, which in
this function yields, or is called, the corresponding matter, or the total
matter in relation to the complex total act.

§27 The testimony of direct intuition. Perceptual
presentation and perception
We close our argument with the ‘testimony of inner perception’, which
should come ﬁrst in exploring controversial questions of description, though
we see reason to prefer speaking of immediate intuitive analysis of the
essences of intentional experiences. Such a reversal of expository order is
permitted and in certain circumstances necessary. We wish in epistemology
to render all due honour to the evidence of a rightly understood, immanent
inspection of essence which is falsely credited to ‘internal perception’. But
this testimony, when appealed to, must be conceptually apprehended and
asserted, and will thereby lose much authority and permit of well-founded
doubts. Different people all appeal to such ‘internal perception’, and come
to quite opposite results: they read different things into it or out of it. This
is true in the case before us. The analyses just done enable us to recognize
this fact, and to distinguish and appraise various illusions which arise in
interpretations of the data of phenomenological inspections of essence. The
same holds in regard to the evidence of general principles based on our
inner intuition of individual cases, based on this evidence, i.e., and not on
interpretative interpolations.
We said above that it was wrong to talk of ‘internal perception’ instead
of ‘immanent inspection of essences’ in making the usual appeals to the
‘evidence of internal perception’. For, if one examines the matter, all such
appeals either serve to establish facts of essence belonging to the pure
phenomenological sphere, or mere transfers of such facts to the sphere of
psychological reality. Assertions of phenomenological fact can never be
epistemologically grounded in psychological experience (Erfahrung), nor in
internal perception in the ordinary sense of the word, but only in ideational,
phenomenological inspection of essence. The latter has its illustrative start
in inner intuition, but such inner intuition need not be actual internal perception or other inner experience (Erfahrung), e.g. recollection: its purposes
are as well or even better served by any free ﬁctions of inner imagination
provided they have enough intuitive clarity. Phenomenological intuition,
however, as often stressed, fundamentally excludes all psychological apperception and real (reale) assertion of existence, all positings of psycho-physical
nature with its actual things, bodies and persons, including one’s own empir-

246 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

ical ego, as well as all that transcends pure consciousness. This exclusion is
achieved eo ipso, since the phenomenological inspection of essence, in its
turning of immanent ideation upon our inner intuitions, only turns its ideating gaze on what is proper to the real (reellen) or intentional being of the
experiences inspected, and only brings to an adequate focus the speciﬁc
modes of experience which such individual experiences exemplify, and the
a priori ideal laws which relate to them. It is of the greatest importance to
be quite clear on this matter. Men are misled by a mere illusion when they
think, in conducting epistemological discussions, or in psychological discussions which base general principles of conscious data on apodictic evidence,
that the source of such evidence lies in inner experience (Erfahrung), and in
particular in internal perception, i.e. in acts which assert existence. This
cardinal error infects that style of psychologism which thinks it has satisﬁed
the requirements of pure logic, ethics and epistemology and that it has gone
beyond extreme empiricism, merely because it speaks of ‘apodictic evidence’
and even of ‘a priori insights’, without ever leaving the ground of internal
experience (Erfahrung) and psychology. It is in principle impossible to go
beyond Hume in this manner, since he too acknowledges the a priori in
the form of ‘relations of ideas’, and yet is so far from distinguishing in principle between inner experience (Erfahrung) and Ideation, that he interprets
the latter nominalistically as a set of contingent facts. [Second Edition comment. Trans.]
Going into more detail, it is, of course, evident that each intentional
experience has its basis in a presentation. It is evident that we cannot judge
if the state of affairs about which we judge is not present to our minds, and
the same is true of enquiring, doubting, surmising, desiring etc. But does a
‘presentation’ here mean what it means in other contexts? May we not be
thralls to an equivocation when we expand this evidence into the principle:
‘Each act-experience is either a mere presentation, or has its basis in presentations’. We are put on our guard by the fact that, if we confront our
experiences in sternly descriptive fashion, we do not by any means always
ﬁnd it possible to analyse the acts which are not ‘mere presentations’ into
the partial acts which supposedly make them up. Let us contrast a case
where intentional reference is plainly compound, and in relation to the same
matter, with one or other of our dubious cases. I cannot rejoice in anything
unless what I rejoice in stands before me in the hues of existence, in the
perceptual, the reminiscent, possibly also the judgemental and assertive
manner. Here the compounding is indubitable. If, e.g., I see and rejoice, the
act-character of my joy has its basis in a percept with its own act-character,
which makes its matter into matter for my joy. The character of my joy may
fall away while my percept remains unaltered. Without doubt, therefore, it
forms part of the concretely complete experience of joy.
Perception offers an example of the dubious compounding of acts. Here
as in all acts we distinguish between quality and matter. Comparison with a

The matter of the act and its underlying presentation 247

corresponding mere presentation, one, e.g., of mere imagination, shows how
the same object can be present as the same (with the same ‘interpretative
sense’), and yet present in an entirely different ‘manner’. In perception the
object seemed to achieve full-bodied presence, to be there in propria persona.
In the imaginative presentation it merely ‘ﬂoats before us’, it is ‘represented’
without achieving full-bodied presence. This is not, however, the difference
that concerns us: ours is a difference of mere ‘moments’, involving neither
matter nor quality, just like, e.g., the difference between perceiving and
recollecting one selfsame object which is present to mind with the same
interpretative sense etc. Let us therefore compare a percept with a mere
presentation that corresponds to it, while abstracting from all such differences. On our conception, a ‘matter’ is abstractly common to both cases,
given in each case in different fashion, and with a differing act-quality. On
the other conception which we were questioning, the matter which underlies
perception is itself a second act-quality, that of an underlying act of mere
presentation. Does analysis reveal anything of the sort? Can we look on a
percept as a compound act in which an independent act of mere presentation can be really isolated?
Perhaps someone will here point to the possibility of an exactly correspondent illusion, and will hold that, once exposed as illusion, it can be seen
as the isolated mere presentation, inwrought without change into our percept
and providing it with its matter. Illusion, while not recognized as illusion,
was simple perception. But, later, its perceptual character, the act-quality of
belief, fell away, and the mere perceptual presentation remained. The same
compounding must be assumed to obtain in all percepts: everywhere the
underlying perceptual presentation – whose quality forms the matter of
perception – will be completed by a belief-character.
Let us discuss the matter more closely in the light of a concrete example.
Wandering about in the Panopticum Waxworks we meet on the stairs a
charming lady whom we do not know and who seems to know us, and who
is in fact the well-known joke of the place: we have for a moment been
tricked by a waxwork ﬁgure. As long as we are tricked, we experience a
perfectly good percept: we see a lady and not a waxwork ﬁgure. When the
illusion vanishes, we see exactly the opposite, a waxwork ﬁgure that only
represents a lady. Such talk of ‘representing’ does not of course mean that
the waxwork ﬁgure is modelled on a lady as in the same waxworks there are
ﬁgure-models of Napoleon, of Bismarck etc. The percept of the wax-ﬁgure
as a thing does not therefore underlie our awareness of the same ﬁgure as
representing the lady. The lady, rather, makes her appearance together with
the wax-ﬁgure and in union with it. Two perceptual interpretations, or two
appearances of a thing, interpenetrate, coinciding as it were in part in their
perceptual content. And they interpenetrate in conﬂicting fashion, so that
our observation wanders from one to another of the apparent objects each
barring the other from existence.

248 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

It can now be argued that while the original perceptual presentation does
not achieve an entirely detached existence, but appears in conjunction with
the new percept of the wax-ﬁgure, it does not serve to found a genuine
percept: only the wax-ﬁgure is perceived, it alone is believed to be really
there. The isolation is achieved after a fashion, which sufﬁces for the present
purpose. But it would only really sufﬁce if we could truly speak of isolation
in this case, if we could, in other words, assume the presentation of the lady
in the second case to be really contained in the original percept of the same
lady. But, when the fraud is exposed, presentation amounts to perceptual
consciousness resolved in conﬂict. But a consciousness qualiﬁed in this
fashion is naturally not part of the original percept. Certainly both have
something in common: they are as like one another in our illustration,
which cannot in this respect be improved upon, as percept and corresponding presentation can possibly be. Certainly both share the same matter, for
which such far-reaching likeness is by no means needed. It is the same lady
who appears on both occasions, and who appears endowed with the same
set of phenomenal properties. But in the one case she stands before us as
real, in the other case as a ﬁction, with a full-bodied appearance which yet
amounts to nothing. The difference lies in the qualities of our acts. It is
almost exactly as if she herself were present, a genuine, actual person: the
unusual likeness in matter and other non-qualitative constituents of our acts
certainly inclines us to slip from a representational into a perceptual mode
of consciousness. It is only the contradiction which this tendency towards
believing perception encounters, as it directs itself upon the beckoning lady,
that prevents us from really yielding to it, a contradiction due to the percept
of the mere wax-doll, which in part coincides with our lady and in other
respects rules her out, and due especially to the note of belief which informs
this latter percept. The difference is, however, plainly of a sort that excludes
the thought that the presentation should be contained in the percept. The
same matter is at one time matter for a percept, and at another time matter
for a mere perceptual ﬁction, but both can evidently not be combined. A
percept cannot also ﬁctitiously construct what it perceives, and a ﬁction
cannot also perceive what it constructs.
Descriptive analysis does not, therefore, favour the view, so obvious to
many, that each percept is a compound, in which a moment of belief, the
characteristic quality of perception, is imposed on a complete act of perceptual presentation, endowed with its own independent quality.

Chapter 4

Study of founding presentations
with special regard to the theory
of judgement

§32 An ambiguity in the word ‘presentation’, and the
supposed self-evidence of the principle that every act
is founded on an act of presentation
If we may take the results of our last chapter as assured, we must distinguish
two concepts of Presentation. Presentation in Sense One is an act (or a
peculiar act-quality) on a level with Judgement, Wish, Question etc. We
have examples of this concept in all cases where isolated words, or where
complete sentences not functioning normally, are merely understood: we
understand indicative, interrogative and optative sentences without ourselves
judging, asking or wishing. The same applies to any unexpressed, merely
ﬂoating thoughts where no ‘attitude’ is taken up, or any mere imaginations
etc.
In Sense Two, ‘Presentation’ is no act, but the matter for an act, constituting one side of the intentional essence of each complete act, or, more
concretely, this matter united with the remaining moments needed for full
concreteness – what we shall later call ‘representation’. This ‘presentation’
underlies every act, and so also underlies the act of presentation (in Sense
One). If this happens, the matter which can function as self-identical in acts
of different sorts, is given with the peculiar act-quality of (‘presentation’, in
a peculiar ‘mode of consciousness’.
If we model the meaning of talk about acts of mere presentation on the
above examples, we can in the case of such acts undoubtedly carry out a
phenomenological analysis in terms of quality and matter just as we could
in the case of other acts. In the case of judgement we distinguish between
the speciﬁc character of conviction, and the contents of the conviction: here
we distinguish between the peculiar mental state of mere understanding,
pure entertainment, and the determination which lays down what we understand. The same plainly holds whatever set of examples one selects to elucidate Mere Presentation or to bring out its notion. It must always be kept in
mind that our present analysis attempts no resolution of acts into parts,
only a distinction of abstract moments or ‘sides’ in them. These appear as

250 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

acts are compared, they are moments contained in the essence of the acts
themselves, they condition the possibility of arranging acts serially according
to their likeness and difference. The likeness and difference intuitively shown
in such a series plainly are the ‘sides’ in question, e.g. quality and matter. In
the same way no one can break up a motion into direction, acceleration etc.:
he can only distinguish these properties in it.
That each intentional experience is either itself a (mere) presentation, or is
based on such a presentation, is a proposition that our previous investigations
have shown to have a merely pretended self-evidence. The mistake rested on
the just discussed ambiguity of ‘presentation’. In its ﬁrst half, the proposition, correctly interpreted, speaks of ‘presentation’ in the sense of a certain
sort of act, in its second half in the sense of the mere matter of acts (completed in the manner indicated above). This second half by itself, i.e. every
intentional experience is based on a presentation, has genuine self-evidence, if
‘presentation’ is interpreted as completed matter. The false proposition we
reject arises if ‘presentation’ is here given the sense of an act as well.
An objection here warns us to take care. Is there only one way in which
‘presentation’ can be interpreted as an act? The questionable proposition
perhaps admits of other interpretations which are not open to our objection.
In that case our treatment would be right as regards the concept of presentation taken over from ordinary explanations of the word, but not right in
regard to other concepts of presentation, nor to the consequently arising
new interpretations of our proposition, with its ever shifting senses.

Chapter 5

Further contributions to the theory of judgement 251

Further contributions to
the theory of judgement.
‘Presentation’ as a qualitatively
unitary genus of nominal and
propositional acts

§37 The aim of the following investigation.
The concept of an objectifying act
The investigations just completed have not done with the question raised
at the beginning of §34 (excised from this edition). Our result was that presentations and judgements are essentially different acts. Since the ambiguity
of words again needs the help of standard-setting concepts, we mean by
‘presentations’ nominal acts, and by ‘judgements’ assertions that are normally
performed and complete. Naming and asserting do not merely differ grammatically, but ‘in essence’, which means that the acts which confer or fulﬁl
meaning for each, differ in intentional essence, and therefore in act-species.
Have we thereby shown that presentation and judgement, the acts which
lend meaning and semantic fulﬁlment to naming and assertion, belong to
different basic classes of intentional experience?
Obviously our answer must be negative: nothing points to such a thing.
We must recall that intentional essence is made up of the two aspects of
matter and quality, and that a distinction of ‘basic class’ obviously relates
only to act-qualities. We must further recall that our exposition does not at
all entail that nominal and propositional acts differ in quality, much less that
they differ generically as regards quality.
This latter point should not arouse objection. The matter of acts is in our
sense no alien, external attachment, but an internal moment, an inseparable
side of the act-intention, of the intentional essence itself. Talk about the
differing ‘ways of consciousness’, in which we can be aware of the same
state of affairs, should not mislead us. It points to a distinction of acts, but
not one of act-qualities. Quality may remain identical – so much has guided
us since we formed the Idea of matter – while the same object remains
differently present to consciousness. One may think, e.g., of equivalent positing presentations, which point by way of differing matters to the same
object. The essential change of meaning which an assertion undergoes when
it passes over into the nominal (or other parallel) function, a point whose
proof we found so important above, may involve no more than a change of

252 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

matter; quality or at least qualitative genus (according to the kind of nominal
modiﬁcation) may remain unchanged.
That this describes the actual situation becomes plain if we carefully attend to the matters themselves. Completion by nominally signiﬁcant articles
like ‘the circumstance that’, ‘the fact that’, where a propositional meaning is
made to function as subject, has been shown by the above examples to be
necessary. The examples introduce us to contexts where transformed sense
goes with a transfer of unchanged, essential, material content, and where,
therefore, interpretative functions are present which the original assertion
lacks, or for which it has substitutes. The essential moments which agree in
the two cases, also undergo, as we can see in each case, a different ‘categorial
structuring’. One may compare, e.g., the form ‘S is P’ with its nominal
modiﬁcation ‘S which is P’.
The following treatments will show, on the other hand, that there is a
qualitative community between nominal and propositional acts; we shall
therefore end by demarcating yet another new concept of presentation, wider
and more signiﬁcant than the former, which will give us a new, most important
interpretation of the principle that each act has its basis in presentations.
To keep our present two concepts of ‘presentation’ apart, we shall –
without making ﬁnal recommendations as to terminology – speak of ‘nominal acts’ in the case of the narrower concept, and of ‘objectifying acts’ in
the case of the wider. We need hardly stress, after our whole introduction of
the concept of ‘nominal presentation’ in the last chapter, that the expression
does not merely cover acts attached to nominal expressions, and conferring
or fulﬁlling their meaning, but also all acts that function analogously, even
if not performing the same grammatical role.

§38 Qualitative and material differentiation of
objectifying acts
Among nominal acts we distinguish positing from non-positing acts. The
former were after a fashion existence-meanings: they were either sensuous
percepts, or percepts in the wider sense of pretended apprehensions of what
is, or other acts which, without claiming to seize an object ‘itself’, in ‘fullbodied’ or intuitive fashion, yet refer to it as existent.1 The other acts leave
the existence of their object unsettled: the object may, objectively considered, exist, but it is not referred to as existent in them, it does not count as
actual, but rather as ‘merely presented’. In all this there is a law to the effect
that to each positing nominal act a non-positing act, a ‘mere presentation’
of like matter, corresponds, and vice versa, this correspondence being understood in the sense of the ideally possible.
A certain modiﬁcation, as we may also express the matter, makes each
positing nominal act pass over into a mere presentation with like matter.
We ﬁnd exactly the same modiﬁcation in the case of judgements. Each

Further contributions to the theory of judgement 253

judgement has its modiﬁed form, an act which merely presents what the
judgement takes to be true, which has an object without a decision as to
truth and falsity.2 Phenomenologically regarded, this modiﬁcation of judgements is quite of the same sort as that of positing nominal acts. Judgements
as positing propositional acts have therefore their merely presentative correlates in non-positing propositional acts. The corresponding acts have in both
cases the same matter and a differing quality. But just as we count positing
and non-positing nominal acts as one genus of quality, we do the same for
propositional acts in regard to judgements and their modiﬁed counterparts.
The qualitative differences are in both cases the same, and not to be
regarded as differentiations of any higher genera of quality. To pass from
the positing to the modiﬁed act is not to pass to a heterogeneous class, as in
the case of passing from any nominal act to a desire or act of will. But in the
passage from a positing nominal act to an act of afﬁrmative assertion, we
are not tempted to see a qualitative difference; the same holds if we compare
the corresponding ‘mere presentations’. Matter alone, in the sense ﬁxed for
the present investigation, constitutes both differences: it alone determines the
unity of the nominal, and the unity of the propositional acts.
This sufﬁces to mark off a comprehensive class of intentional experiences
which includes all the acts hitherto dealt with in their qualitative essence, and
determines the widest concept that the term ‘presentation’ can stand for within
the total class of intentional experiences. We ourselves would like to call this
qualitatively unitary class, taken in its natural width, the class of objectifying
acts. It yields (to put the matter clearly in front of us):
1. through qualitative differentiation, the division into positing acts – acts
of belief or judgement in the sense of Mill and Brentano respectively – and
non-positing acts, acts ‘modiﬁed’ as regards positing, the corresponding
‘mere presentations’. How far the concept of positing belief extends, and
how it is speciﬁed, remains undetermined;
2. through differentiation of matter, it yields the difference of nominal
and propositional acts, though we still must consider whether this difference
is not merely one of many equally valid material differences.
A glance over the analyses of the last chapter,3 makes us aware of the truly
pervasive opposition between synthetic, many-rayed act-uniﬁes and singlerayed acts, acts which posit or entertain something in a single thesis. We must
note, however, that predicative synthesis is only an especially favoured form
(or complete system of forms) of synthesis, to which other frequently inwoven
forms stand opposed, e.g. the form of conjunctive or disjunctive synthesis.
We have, for example, in the plural predication ‘A and B and C are P’ a
unitary predication terminating in three predicative layers on the same predicate P. ‘Upon’ the basic positing of A, the secondary positing of B, and the
tertiary positing of C, the predicate P, kept identical throughout, is posited
in a single, three-layered act. Our act of judgement is as it were articulated
by a ‘caesura’ into a subject- and a predicate-positing, but so that the one

254 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

subject-member is in its turn a unitary conjunction of three nominal members. These are united in the conjunction, but they do not come together
in one nominal presentation. But it is true of the ‘conjunctive’ (or better
‘collective’) synthesis, as it is true of the predicative synthesis, that it permits
of nominalization, in which case the collective object constituted by the
synthesis, becomes the simply presented object of a new ‘single-rayed’ act,
and so is made ‘objective’ in the pregnant sense of the word. The nominal
presentation of the collection now again refers back in its own sense (in
the matter from the original act that it takes over and modiﬁes) to the
matter (or the consciousness) which originally constituted it. Closer examination reveals in all synthesis what we noted in the case of the predicative
synthesis – when we kept, moreover, to the basic predicative form of categorical synthesis – that we can always perform the fundamental operation of
nominalization, the transformation of many-rayed synthesis into single-rayed
naming with an appropriate backward reference in our material.
Our general treatment of ideally possible objectifying acts therefore
brings us back to the basic distinction of ‘thetic’ and ‘synthetic’ acts, of
‘single-rayed’ and ‘many-rayed’ acts. The single-rayed acts are not articulate,
the many-rayed acts are articulate. Each member has its objectifying quality
(its peculiar stance towards being, or the corresponding qualitative modiﬁcation of this stance) and its matter. The whole synthesis as a single objectifying
act has likewise a quality and a matter, the latter articulate. To analyse such
a whole is, on the one hand, to come upon members and, on the other, upon
syntactical forms of synthesis. The members in their turn may be simple or
complete. They may themselves be articulate and synthetically uniﬁed, as in
our above example of the conjunctive subjects of plural predications, or as
in the case of conjoined antecedents in hypothetical predications, or as in
the corresponding disjunctions in either case etc.
We at length come down to simple members, single-rayed in their
objectiﬁcation, but not necessarily primitive in some ultimate sense. For such
single-rayed members may still be nominalized syntheses, nominal presentations of states of affairs or collectiva or disjunctiva, whose members may
again be states of affairs etc. Our matter will therefore contain backward
references of a more or less complex sort, and therefore, in a peculiarly
modiﬁed, indirect sense, implicit articulations and synthetic forms. If the
members no longer refer back, they are also simple in this respect. This is,
e.g., plainly true of all proper name-presentations, and of single-membered
percepts, imaginations, etc., which are not split up by explanatory syntheses.
Such wholly straightforward objectiﬁcations are free from all ‘categorial
forms’. Plainly the analysis of each act that is not straightforward in its
objectiﬁcations, must pursue the series of backward references contained
in its nominalizations, until it comes down upon such straightforward actmembers, simple both in form and in matter. We may ﬁnally note that the
general treatment of possible articulations and synthetic formations leads to

Further contributions to the theory of judgement 255

the pure logico-grammatical laws discussed in our Fourth Investigation. In
this respect only matters (objectifying act-senses) are relevant, and in these
all forms of structured objectifying synthesis express themselves. Here the
principle obtains that our self-contained objectifying matter (and therefore
any possible non-dependent meaning) can function as a member in every
synthesis of every possible form. This entails the particular principle that
each such matter is either a complete propositional (predicative) matter or
a possible member of such a matter. If we now bring in qualities, we can
afﬁrm the principle that, ideally regarded, any objectifying matter can be
combined with any quality.
If we now look at the special difference between nominal and propositional
acts, which is of such particular interest in our present Investigation, the
just-mentioned possibility of combining any quality with any matter can
be readily conﬁrmed. In the analyses of previous sections, it has not been
made universally plain, since we conﬁned ourselves to modiﬁcations of the
judgement, i.e. a positing propositional act, into a nominal act. Undeniably,
however, each judgement modiﬁed into a ‘mere’ presentation can be transformed into a corresponding nominal act. Thus ‘2 × 2 = 5’, uttered to
express understanding and not to take up an assertive stance, can be changed
into the name ‘that 2 × 2 = 5’. Since ‘modiﬁcations’ are spoken of in the
case of such transformations of propositions into names as leave qualities
unaffected, i.e. in the case of mere transformations of propositional or
other synthetic matters, it will be well to reserve the name ‘qualitative modiﬁcation’ for the quite different type of modiﬁcation which affects qualities
(transforming of positing names and statements into non-positing ones).
Where the matter, which alone gives form or underlies formal distinctions,
either remains, or is meant to remain constant, where a name stays a name,
a proposition a proposition, in all their internal articulations and forms, we
shall also have to speak of conformative modiﬁcations of positing acts. But if
the notion of conformative modiﬁcation is widened, by a natural extension,
so as to cover every modiﬁcation not affecting act-material, then (as we shall
presently see) it will be a wider notion than our present concept of qualitative modiﬁcation.

§39 Presentation in the sense of an objectifying act,
and its qualitative modification
When we grouped objectifying acts into a single class, we were decisively
moved by the fact that this whole class is characterized by one qualitative
opposition: just as there is a ‘merely presentative’ counterpart to each nominal belief, so there is one in the case of each propositional belief, each
complete judgement. We may now doubt, however, whether this qualitative
modiﬁcation really characterizes a class, whether it does not rather govern
the whole sphere of such experiences, and provide a basis for dividing them.

256 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

An obvious argument favours this last: there is a mere presentation corresponding to every intentional experience, to a wish the mere idea of a
wish, to a hate the mere idea of a hate, to a volition the mere idea of willing
etc. – just as there are mere presentations corresponding to actual cases of
naming and assertion.
One should not, however, mix up quite different things. To each possible
act, to each possible experience, to each possible object in general, there is a
presentation which relates to it, and which can as readily be qualiﬁed as
positing as non-positing (as ‘mere’ presentation). Fundamentally, however,
we have not here one, but a whole multitude of presentations of different
sorts: this is true even if we restrict ourselves (as we would seem tacitly to
have done) to presentations of nominal type. Such a presentation can present
its object intuitively or notionally, directly or by way of attributes, and can
do so very differently. But it sufﬁces for our purposes to speak of one
presentation, or to high-light any one variety of presentation, e.g. the imaginative, since all varieties of presentation are in each case and in the same
way possible.
To each object, therefore, corresponds the presentation of that object, to
a house the presentation of a house, to a presentation the presentation of
the presentation, to a judgement the presentation of a judgement etc. Here
we must note, however, as indicated above, that the presentation of the
judgement is not the presentation of the state of affairs judged. Just so,
more generally, the presentation of a positing is not the presentation of the
positingly presented object. Different objects are presented in each case.
The will, e.g., to realize a state of affairs, differs from the will to realize a
judgement or the nominal positing of this state of affairs. A positing act’s
qualitative counterpart corresponds to it in quite different fashion from the
fashion in which its presentation, or any act’s presentation, corresponds to
that act. Modifying an act qualitatively is quite a different ‘operation’, as it
were, from producing a presentation ‘of’ this act. The true difference between
these operations comes out in the fact that the operation of presentative objectiﬁcation, shown symbolically in the sequence O, P(O), P(P(O)) . . . where O
is any object and P(O) its presentation, admits of iteration, whereas qualitative
modiﬁcation does not, and in the further fact that presentative objectiﬁcation
applies to all objects whatever, whereas qualitative modiﬁcation only makes
sense in the case of acts. It also comes out in the fact that, in the one order
of modiﬁcations, ‘presentations’ are exclusively nominal, whereas the other
order is not so restricted, and in the further fact that, in the ﬁrst order,
qualities remain irrelevant, and modiﬁcation only affects matters, whereas, in
the other order of modiﬁcation, it is precisely quality that is modiﬁed. Each
act of belief has a ‘mere presentation’ as its counterpart, which presents the
same object in precisely the same manner, i.e. on the ground of the same
matter, and only differs from the former act in that it leaves the presented
object in suspense, and does not refer to it positingly as existent. Such a

Further contributions to the theory of judgement 257

modiﬁcation can of course not be repeated, as little as it makes sense in the
case of acts not ranged under the notion of belief. It therefore creates a quite
peculiar connection between acts of this quality and their counterparts. A
positing percept or recollection, e.g., has its counterpart in a corresponding
act of ‘mere’ imagination having the same matter, as in, e.g., the intuitive
percept of an image, the consideration of a painting that we allow to inﬂuence us purely artistically, without in any way responding to the existence or
non-existence of what is represented, or the intuition of some mental picture
where we drop all stances towards existence and lose ourselves in fantasy.
‘Mere’ presentation has here no further counterpart: it is unintelligible what
such a presentation could mean or achieve. If belief has been transformed
into mere presentation, we can at best return to belief: There is no modiﬁcation that can be repeated in the same sense, and carried on further.
The case is different if we pass from the operation of qualitative modiﬁcation to that of nominalizing, presentative objectiﬁcation. Here there is an
evident possibility of iteration. This is most simply shown in the relation
of acts to the ego, and their division among different persons and points
of time. At one time I perceive something, at another I present to myself
that I am perceiving it, at yet another I present to myself that I am presenting
to myself that I am perceiving it etc.4 Or another example: A is painted, a
second painting represents the ﬁrst painting, a third the second etc. The
differences are obvious in these cases, and they are of course not merely
differences in sense-contents, but in the interpretative act-characters (and
their intentional ‘matters’) without which it would be quite senseless to talk
of mental images, paintings etc. These differences are immanently apprehended, are phenomenologically certain, as soon as the corresponding experiences have been had, and their intentional differences reﬂected upon. This
happens, e.g., when a man draws distinctions and says: I am now perceiving
A, picturing B, while C is represented in this painting etc. A man who has
become clear regarding these relations, will not fall into the error of those
who think presentations of presentations phenomenologically undiscoverable,
in fact mere ﬁctions. Such judgements confuse the two operations distinguished here: they substitute the presentation of a mere presentation for the
utterly impossible qualitative modiﬁcation of this presentation.
We may now, it seems, assume a community of kind 5 among qualities
coordinated by conformative modiﬁcation, and may think it true that one
or other of these qualities pertains to all acts, entering essentially into the
unitary structure of each qualitatively unmodiﬁed or modiﬁed judgement,
whether we consider acts of mere signiﬁcant intention or acts which fulﬁl
meaning. It is obvious, further, that the mere presentations of any act whatever, which we distinguished above from the qualitative counterparts possible only in the case of positing acts, are, as mere presentations, themselves
qualitative counterparts, but not to their acts of origin, which are rather
their presented objects. The mere presentation of a wish is no counterpart of

258 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

a wish, but of any positing act, e.g. a percept, directed upon this wish. This
pair, percept and mere presentation of a wish, are of one kind, whereas the
wish and its percept or imagination or any other presentation which relates
to it, differ in kind.

§40 Continuation. Qualitative and imaginative
modification
One is readily led to call positing acts afﬁrmative ( fürwahrhaltende), their
counterparts imaginative. Both expressions have at ﬁrst blush their objections, which especially impede the terminological ﬁxation of the latter. The
discussion of these objections will prompt us to make certain not unimportant additions.
The whole tradition of logic only speaks of afﬁrmation in the case of
judgements, i.e. the meanings of statements, but now we wish to call all
percepts, recollections, anticipations, and all acts of normally expressed
positing, ‘afﬁrmations’. The word ‘imagination’, likewise, normally means a
non-positing act, but we should have to extend its original meaning beyond
the sphere of sensuous imagination, so as to cover all possible counterparts
of afﬁrmations. Its meaning will also require restriction, since we must
exclude all thought of imaginations as conscious ﬁctions, as objectless
presentations or false opinions. Often enough we understand narrations
without decision as to their truth or falsity. Even when we read novels, this
is normally the case: we know we are dealing with aesthetic ﬁctions, but this
knowledge remains inoperative in the purely aesthetic effect.6 In such cases
all expressions express non-positing acts, ‘imaginings’ in the sense of our
proposed terminology, both in respect of signiﬁcant intentions and of fancied
fulﬁlments. This also affects complete assertions. Judgements are passed in
a certain manner, but they lack the character of genuine judgements: we
neither believe, deny or doubt what is told us – mere ‘imaginings’ replace
genuine judgements. Such talk must not be taken to mean that imagined
judgements here take the place of actual ones. We rather enact, instead of a
judgement afﬁrming a state of affairs, the qualitative modiﬁcation, the neutral
putting in suspense of the same state of affairs, which cannot be identiﬁed
with any picturing of it.
The name ‘imagination’ has an inconvenience which seriously blocks its use
as a term: it suggests an imaginative or fanciful conception, pictorial in the
stricter sense, while we can by no means say that all non-positing acts involve
imagining, and that all positing acts are non-imagining. This last is immediately clear. A pictured sensuous object can as readily come before us posited
as existent, as merely imagined in modiﬁed fashion. This can be so, while
the representative content of its intuition remains identical, the content which
not merely gives the intuition its determinate relation to this object, but also
the character of imaginative, i.e. of fanciful or pictorial representation, of it.

Further contributions to the theory of judgement 259

The phenomenal content of a painting, with its painted ﬁgures etc., remains,
e.g., the same, whether we regard these as representing real objects, or allow
them to inﬂuence us aesthetically without positing anything. It is most doubtful whether anything similar occurs in its purity in normal perception: whether
perception can preserve the rest of its phenomenological features, but be
qualitatively modiﬁed, so as to lose its normal positing character. It may be
doubted whether the characteristic perceptual view of the object as itself
present in full-bodied reality, would not at once pass over into a pictureview, where the object, much as in the case of normal perceptual pictureconsciousness (paintings and the like) appears portrayed rather than as
itself given. Yet one might here point to many sensible appearances, e.g.
stereoscopic phenomena, which one can treat, like aesthetic objects, as
‘mere phenomena’, without adopting an existential stance, and yet treat as
‘themselves’, and not as portraits of something else. It sufﬁces that perception can pass over into a corresponding picturing (an act with like ‘matter’
differently interpreted) yet without change in its positing character.
We see that two conformative modiﬁcations may here be distinguished:
one qualitative and one imaginative. In both the ‘matter’ remains unchanged.
But with matter unchanged, more than quality can alter in an act. Quality
and matter we took to be absolutely essential to acts, since inseparable from
them, and relevant to their meaning, but we originally pointed out that other
aspects could be distinguished in them. Our next investigation will show more
precisely the relevance of these last two distinctions between non-intuitive
objectiﬁcation and intuition, and between perception and imagination.
When the descriptive relations are clariﬁed, it is plainly a purely terminological issue whether one limits the word ‘judgement’, in the sense of tradition, to the unmodiﬁed meaning of statements, or applies it throughout the
sphere of acts of belief. In the former case no ‘ground-class’ of acts, not
even a lowest qualitative difference, is completely covered, since the ‘matter’
– which for us covers the ‘is not’ as well as the ‘is’ – assists in the demarcation. All this is, however, irrelevant. Since ‘judgement’ is a logical term, it is
for logical interests and logical tradition alone to decide what concept will
be its meaning. It has to be said, in this connection, that a notion so fundamental as that of an (ideal) propositional meaning, being the ultimate point
of unity to which all things logical must relate, must retain its natural,
traditional expression. The term ‘act of judging’ must therefore be conﬁned
to corresponding types of act, to the signiﬁcant intentions behind complete
statements, and to the fulﬁlments which ﬁt in with these and share their
semantic essence. To call all positing acts ‘judgements’ tends to obscure the
essential distinction, despite all qualitative community, between nominal
and propositional acts, and so to confuse an array of important relationships. The case of the term ‘presentation’ resembles that of the term ‘judgement’. Logical requirements must decide what logic is to mean by it. Heed
must be paid to the (mutually) exclusive separation of presentation and

260 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

judgement, and to the fact that a ‘presentation’ claims to be something from
which a complete judgement may possibly be built up. Shall one then accept the
notion of presentation, as comprehending all possible part-meanings of logical
judgement, which Bolzano made basic for his treatment of Wissenschaftslehre?
Or shall one limit one’s notion to what are, phenomenologically speaking,
relatively independent meanings of this type, complete members of judgements and, in particular, nominal acts? Or shall one not follow another
route of division, and treat as presentations the mere representations, i.e. the
total content of all acts that survives the abstraction of quality, and only
preserves the ‘matter’ out of their intentional essence? These are difﬁcult
questions which can certainly not be decided here.

§41 New interpretation of the principle that makes
presentations the bases of all acts. The objectifying
act as the primary bearer of ‘matter’
Several thinkers in olden and more modern times have interpreted the term
‘presentation’ so widely as to include ‘afﬁrmative’ acts, particularly judgements, as well as ‘merely presentative’ acts, in its purview, and so to include
in this the whole sphere of objectifying acts. If we now base ourselves on
this important concept which sums up a closed class of quality, our proposition regarding basic presentations gains a highly signiﬁcant, novel sense – as
pointed out above – of which the former sense based on the nominal concept of presentation, is merely a secondary offshoot. For we may say: Each
intentional experience is either an objectifying act or has its basis in such an
act, i.e. it must, in the latter case, contain an objectifying act among its
constituents, whose total matter is individually the same as its total matter.
What we previously said,7 in expounding the sense of this as yet unclariﬁed
proposition, can now be practically used word for word in justiﬁcation of
the term ‘objectifying act’. If no act, or act-quality, not objectifying by
nature, can acquire ‘matter’ except through an objectifying act that is inwoven
with it in unity, objectifying acts have the unique function of ﬁrst providing other acts with presented objects, to which they may then refer in their
novel ways. The reference to an object is, in general terms, constituted in an
act’s ‘matter’. But all matter, according to our principle, is the matter of an
objectifying act, and only through the latter can it become matter for a new
act-quality founded upon this. We must after a fashion distinguish between
secondary and primary intentions, the latter owing their intentionality to
their foundation on the former. Whether primary objectifying acts are of a
positing, afﬁrming, believing character, or of a non-positing, merely presenting, neutral character, does not affect this function. Many secondary
acts invariably require afﬁrmations, as, e.g. joy and sorrow: for others mere
modiﬁcations sufﬁce, e.g. for wishes or aesthetic feelings. Quite often there
is a complex underlying objectifying act, including acts of both sorts.

Chapter 6

Summing-up of the most important
ambiguities in the terms
‘presentation’ and ‘content’

§44 ‘Presentation’
In the last chapter we have encountered a fourfold or ﬁvefold ambiguity
attaching to the word ‘presentation’.
1. Presentation as act-material or matter, which can be readily completed
into: Presentation as the representation underlying the act, i.e. the full
content of the act exclusive of quality. This concept also played a part in
our treatment, though our special interest in the relation between quality
and matter made it important for us to lay special stress on the latter. The
matter tells us, as it were, what object is meant in the act, and in what sense
it is there meant. ‘Representation’ brings in the additional moments lying
outside of the intentional essence which determine whether the object is
referred to in, e.g., a perceptually intuitive or imaginatively intuitive fashion, or in a merely non-intuitive mode of reference. Comprehensive analyses
will be devoted to all this in the ﬁrst section of the next Investigation.
2. Presentation as ‘mere presentation’, as qualitative modiﬁcation of any
form of belief, e.g. as mere understanding of propositions, without an inner
decision leading to assent or dissent, surmise or doubt etc.
3. Presentation as nominal act, e.g. as the subject-presentation of an act of
assertion.
4. Presentation as objectifying act, i.e. in the sense of an act-class necessarily represented in every complete act since every ‘matter’ (or ‘representation’) must be given primarily as the matter of such an act. This qualitative
ground-class includes acts of belief, whether nominal or propositional, as
well as their counterparts, so that all presentations in the second and third
of our above senses are included here.
The more precise analysis of these concepts of presentation or the experiences they comprise, and the ﬁnal determination of their mutual relations,
will be a task for further phenomenological investigations. Here we shall
only try to add some further equivocations to those affecting the term under
discussion. To keep them sharply apart is of fundamental importance in
our logical and epistemological endeavours. The phenomenological analyses

262 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

indispensably needed to resolve these equivocations, have only been partially encountered in our previous expositions. What is missing has, however,
often been touched upon, and indicated to an extent that makes a brief list
of headings possible. We therefore continue our enumeration as follows:
5. Presentation is often opposed to mere thinking. The same difference is
then operative that we also call the difference between intuition and concept.
Of an ellipsoid I have a presentation, though not of a surface of Kummer:
through suitable drawings, models or theoretically guided ﬂights of fancy
I can also achieve a presentation of the latter. A round square, a regular
icosahedron1 and similar a priori impossibilia are in this sense ‘unpresentable’.
The same holds of a completely demarcated piece of a Euclidean manifold
of more than three dimensions, of the number π, and of other constructs
quite free from contradiction. In all these cases of non-presentability ‘mere
concepts’ are given to us: more precisely, we have nominal expressions
inspired by signiﬁcant intentions in which the objects of our reference are
‘thought’ more or less indeﬁnitely, and particularly in the indeﬁnite attributive form of an A as the mere bearer of deﬁnitely named attributes. To mere
thinking ‘presentation’ is opposed: plainly this means the intuition which
gives fulﬁlment, and adequate fulﬁlment, to the mere meaning-intention.
The new class of cases is favoured because in it ‘corresponding intuitions’
are added member by member and from all sides to thought-presentations
– whether these are purely symbolic meaning-intentions or fragmentarily
and inadequately mixed with intuitions – presentations which leave our deepest cognitive cravings unsatisﬁed. What we intuit stands before our eyes in
perception or imagination just as we intended it in our thought. To present
something to oneself means therefore to achieve a corresponding intuition of
what one merely thought of or what one meant but only at best very inadequately intuited.
6. A very common concept of presentation concerns the opposition of
imagination to perception. This notion of presentation dominates ordinary
discourse. If I see St Peter’s Church, I do not have an ‘idea’, a presentation
of it. But I do have the latter, when I picture it in my memory, or when it
stands before me in a painting or drawing etc.
7. A presentation has just been identiﬁed with the concrete act of imagination. But, looked at more narrowly, a physical thing-image is also called a
presentation or representation of what it depicts, as, e.g., in the words ‘This
photograph represents St Peter’s Church’. The word ‘presentation’ is also
applied to the apparent image-object, in distinction from the image-subject
or thing represented. This is here the thing appearing in photographic colours, not the photographed church (image-subject), and it only presents
(represents) the latter. These ambiguities carry over into the straightforward
pictured presence of memory or mere imagination. The appearance of the
fancied object as such in experience is naïvely interpreted as the real containment of an image in consciousness. What appears, in its mode of

Summing-up of the most important ambiguities 263

appearing, counts as an inner picture, like a painted picture presenting the
imagined object. In all this it is not realized that the inner ‘picture’ is intentionally constituted, and that so is the way in which it and other possible
pictures present one and the same thing, and that it cannot be counted as a
real moment in the imaginative experience.2
8. In all cases of this ambiguous talk of presentation, where a picturing
relation is supposed, the following thought also seems active. A very inadequate picture ‘represents’ a thing and also recalls it, is a sign of it, and this
last in the sense that it is able to introduce a direct presentation of it that
is richer in content. A photograph recalls an original, and also is its representative, in a manner its surrogate. Its pictorial presentation makes many
judgements possible, that would otherwise need a basis in a percept of the
original. A sign remote in content from a thing often fulﬁls similar functions, e.g. an algebraic symbol. It arouses the presentation of what it stands
for, even if this is something non-intuitive, an integral etc.; it turns our
thought towards this, as when we represent to ourselves the complete
deﬁnitory sense of the integral. At the same time, the sign functions ‘representatively’, surrogatively, in a context of mathematical operations: one
operates with it in additions, multiplications etc., as if the symbolized were
directly given in it. Previous discussions have shown this mode of expression
to be rather crude,3 but it expresses the governing notion in our use of
‘presentation’, which here means representation in the double sense of
provoking presentations and doing duty for them. Thus the mathematician
drawing on the blackboard says: ‘Let OX represent (present) the asymptote
of the hyperbola’, or, calculating, ‘Let x represent (present) the root of
the equation f(x) = O’. A sign, whether it depicts or names, is called the
‘representation’ (‘presentation’) of what it stands for.
Our present talk of representation (which we do not wish to erect into a
ﬁxed terminology) relates to objects. These ‘representative objects’ are
constituted in certain acts, and acquire a representative character for new
objects in certain new acts of transcendent (hinausdeutenden) presentation.
Another, more primitive sense of ‘representation’ was mentioned under
(1): this made ‘representatives’ experienced contents receiving an objectifying
interpretation in such representation, and in this manner helping to present
objects, without becoming objective themselves.
This leads to a new ambiguity.
9. The distinction between perception and imagination (which latter itself
shows important descriptive differences) is always confused with the distinction between sensations and images. The former is a distinction of acts,
the latter of non-acts, which receive interpretation in acts of perception
or imagination. (If one wishes to call all contents which are in this sense
‘representative’, ‘sensations’, we shall have to have the distinct terms
‘impressional’ and ‘reproductive sensations’.) If there are essential descriptive differences between sensations and images, if the usually mentioned

264 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

differences of liveliness, constancy, elusiveness etc., are sufﬁcient, or if a
varying mode of consciousness must be brought in, cannot be discussed
here. Anyhow we are sure that possible distinctions of content do not make
up the difference between perception and imagination, which analysis shows,
with indubitable clarity, to be a difference of acts qua acts. We cannot
regard what is descriptively given in perception or imagination as a mere
complex of experienced sensations or images. The all too common confusion between them is, however, grounded in the fact that at one time a
‘presentation’ is understood as an imaginative idea (in the sense of (6) and
(7) ), at another time as a corresponding image (the complex of representative contents or imagery), so that a new ambiguity arises.
10. The confusion between an appearance (e.g., a concrete imaginative
experience or a ‘mental picture’), and what appears in it, leads us to call the
presented object a presentation (idea). This applies to perceptions, and generally to presentations in the sense of mere intuitions or logically interpreted
intuitions, e.g. ‘The world is my idea’.
11. The notion that all conscious experiences (contents in the real
(reellen)4 phenomenological sense) are ‘in consciousness’, in the sense of inner
perception or some other inner orientation (consciousness, original apperception), and that with this orientation a presentation is eo ipso given (consciousness or the ego represents the content to itself), led to all contents of
consciousness being called ‘presentations’. These are the ‘ideas’ of the English
empiricist philosophy since Locke. (Hume calls them ‘perceptions’.) To have
an experience and to experience a content: these expressions are often used as
equivalent.
In logic it is very important to separate the speciﬁcally logical concepts
of presentation (idea) from other concepts of it. That there are several
such concepts has already been indicated in passing. We may again mention
one not included in our list so far, Bolzano’s notion of the ‘presentation in
itself’, which we interpreted as equal to every independent or dependent
part-meaning within a complete assertion.
In connection with all purely logical concepts of presentation, we must,
on the one hand, distinguish the ideal presentation from the real (realen)4
one, e.g. the nominal presentation in the purely logical sense and the acts in
which it is realized. And, on the other hand, we must distinguish between
the mere meaning-intentions and the experiences which fulﬁl them more or
less adequately, i.e. presentations in the sense of intuitions.
13. Beside the aforementioned ambiguities, whose danger is obvious to
all who seriously absorb themselves in the phenomenology of the thoughtexperiences, there are others which are in part less important. We may for
instance mention talk of presentation (idea) in the sense of Opinion (δξα).
This is an ambiguity which arose through gradual transformations as occurs
in all similar terms. I recall the verbally manifold, but always equivalent
phrases: It is a widely held opinion, idea, view, conception etc.

Summing-up of the most important ambiguities 265

§45 The ‘presentational content’
Expressions correlative to ‘presentation’ naturally have a correspondent
ambiguity. This is particularly the case in regard to talk about ‘what is
presented in a presentation’, i.e. about the ‘content’ of a presentation. That
a mere distinction between content and object of presentations, like the one
recommended by Twardowski following Zimmerman, will not remotely
sufﬁce – however meritorious it may have been to dig down to any formdifferences in this ﬁeld – is clear from our analyses up to this point. In the
logical sphere – to which these authors limit themselves without being aware
of their limitation – there is not one thing which can be distinguished as
‘content’ from the object named; there are several things which can and must
be so distinguished. Above all, we can mean by ‘content’, in the case, e.g.,
of a nominal presentation, its meaning as an ideal unity: the presentation in
the sense of pure logic. To this corresponds, as a real (reelles) moment in
the real (reellen) content of the presentative act, the intentional essence with
its presentative quality and matter. We can further distinguish, in this real
(reellen) content, the separable contents not belonging to the intentional
essence: the ‘contents’ which receive their interpretation in the act-consciousness (in the intentional essence), i.e. the sensations and images. To these are
again added, in the case of many presentations, variously meant differences
of form and content: particularly important is here the difference of matter
(in a totally new sense) and categorial form, with which we shall have to
concern ourselves a great deal. With this is connected the by no means
univocal talk concerning the content of concepts: content = sum total of
‘properties’, in distinction from their mode of combination. How dubious
‘blanket’ talk about ‘content’ can be, when we merely oppose act, content
and object, is shown by the difﬁculties and confusions into which Twardowski
fell, and which have in part been exposed above. We may point particularly
to his talk of ‘presentative activity moving in two directions’, his complete
ignoring of meaning in the ideal sense, his psychologistic elimination of
plain differences of meaning by recourse to etymological distinctions and,
lastly, his treatment of the doctrine of ‘intentional inexistence’ and the doctrine of universal objects.
Note. In recent times a view has often been expressed which denies the
difference between presentation and presented content, or at least denies its
phenomenological ostensibility. One’s attitude to this rejection naturally
depends on one’s interpretation of the words ‘presentation’ and ‘content’. If
these are interpreted as the mere having of sensations and images, and the
phenomenological moment of interpretation is ignored or discounted, it is
right to deny a distinct act of presentation: presentation and presented are
one and the same. The mere having of the content, as a mere experiencing
of an experience, is no intentional experience, directing itself upon an object

266 On intentional experiences and their ‘contents’

by way of an interpretative sense: it is, in particular, not an introspective
percept. For this reason we identiﬁed a sensation with a sensational content.
But can anyone doubt, once he has distinguished the various concepts of
presentation, that a concept so delimited is impossible to sustain, and has
arisen merely through a misinterpretation of original, intentional notions of
presentation? However the notion of presentation is deﬁned, it is universally
seen as a pivotal concept, not only for psychology, but also for epistemology and logic, and particularly for pure logic. A man who admits this,
and yet bases himself on the above rejection, has eo ipso involved himself in
confusion. For this concept has no part to play in epistemology and pure
logic.
Only through this confusion can I explain how a thinker as pentrating as
v. Ehrenfels, on occasion maintained (Zeitschr. f. Psychologie u. Physiologie
der Sinnesorgane, XVI, 1898) that we cannot dispense with a distinction
between act and content of presentation since without it we should be unable to state the psychological difference between the presentation of an
object A, and the presentation of a presentation of this object. For the rest,
he informs us, he has no direct assurance of the existence of such a phenomenon. I myself should say that an act of presentation is as such directly
intuited, precisely where this distinction between a presentation and a presentation of this presentation is phenomenologically drawn. Were there no
such cases, no earthly argument could possibly provide an indirect justiﬁcation of the distinction in question. Just so, I believe, we have directly
established the existence of an act of presentation in becoming clear as to
the difference between a mere sound-pattern and the same pattern understood
as a name etc.

Foreword
to the Edition
second edition
Volume II, Part 2 of the Second
German

267

Foreword to the Second Edition (1921)

The present new edition of the ﬁnal part of my Logical Investigations does
not correspond, unfortunately, with the notice in the Preface added in 1913
to the ﬁrst volume of the Second Edition. I was forced to a decision to
publish the old text, only essentially improved in a few sections, instead of
the radical revision of which a considerable portion was already in print at
the time. Once again the old proverb came true: that books have their
destinies. The exhaustion naturally consequent on a period of overwork ﬁrst
forced me to interrupt the printing. Theoretical difﬁculties that had made
themselves felt as the printing progressed, called for revolutionary transformations of the newly planned text, for which fresher mental powers were
necessary. In the war years which followed, I was unable to muster, on
behalf of the phenomenology of logic, that passionate engagement without
which fruitful work is impossible for me. I could only bear the war and the
ensuing ‘peace’ by absorption in the most general philosophical reﬂections,
and by again taking up my works devoted to the methodological and material elaboration of the Idea of a phenomenological philosophy, to the systematic sketch of its foundations, to the arrangement of its work-problems
and the continuation of such concrete investigations as were in these connections indispensable. My new teaching activity at Freiburg favoured a
direction of my interest to dominant generalities and to system. Only very
recently have these systematic studies led me back into the territories where
my phenomenological researches originated, and have recalled me to my
old work on the foundations of pure logic which has so long awaited completion and publication. Divided as I am between intensive teaching and
research, it is uncertain when I shall be in a position to adapt my old writings
to the advances since made, and to recast their literary form. It is also
uncertain whether I shall use the text of the Sixth Investigation for this
purpose, or shall give my plans, whose content already goes far beyond the
text, the form of an entirely new book.
As things stand, I have yielded to the pressures of the friends of the
present work, and have decided to make its last part once more accessible,
at least in its old form.

268 Foreword to the second edition

The First Section, that I could not revise in detail without endangering
the style of the whole, I have allowed to be reprinted practically verbatim.
But in the Second Section on Sense and understanding by which I set particular store, I have, on the other hand, continually intervened to improve
the form of the text. I remain of the opinion that the chapter on ‘Sensuous
and categorial intuitions’, together with the preparatory arguments of the
preceding chapters, has opened the way for a phenomenological clariﬁcation of logical self-evidence (and eo ipso of its parallels in the axiological and
practical sphere). Many misunderstandings of my Ideas towards a Pure Phenomenology would not have been possible had these chapters been attended to.
Quite obviously, the immediacy of the vision of universal essences spoken of
in the Ideas, implies, like the immediacy of any other categorial intuition, an
opposition to the mediacy of a non-intuitive, e.g. an emptily symbolic thought.
But people have substituted for this immediacy, the immediacy of intuition
in the ordinary sense of the word, just because they were unacquainted
with the distinction, fundamental to any theory of reason, of sensible and
categorial intuition. I think it shows something about the contemporary
state of philosophical science that straightforward statements of such incisive
meaning, presented in a work that for nearly two decades has been much
attacked, but also much used, should have remained without noticeable
literary effect.
The position is similar in the case of the textually improved chapter on
‘The A priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking’. It at least offers
a blueprint for the ﬁrst radical worsting of psychologism in the theory of
Reason. This blueprint makes its ‘breakthrough’ within the framework of
an Investigation exclusively concerned with formal logic, and is therefore
restricted to the Reason of formal logic. With how little deep attention this
chapter is read, is shown by the often heard, but to my mind grotesque
reproach, that I may have rejected psychologism sharply in the ﬁrst volume
of my work, but that I fell back into psychologism in the second. It does not
affect what I have said to add that, after twenty years of further work, I
should not write at many points as I then wrote, and that I do not approve
of much that I then wrote, e.g. the doctrine of categorial representation.
Nonetheless, I think I can say that even the immature and misguided elements in my work deserve a close pondering. For everything and all that is
there said, derives from a research which actually reaches up to the things
themselves, which orients itself towards their intuitive self-givenness, and
which also has that eidetic-phenomenological attitude to pure consciousness
through which alone a fruitful theory of reason becomes possible. Anyone
who here, as also in the Ideas, wishes to grasp the sense of my arguments,
must not be afraid of considerable efforts, including the efforts of ‘bracketing’ his own notions and convictions upon the same, or the putatively same,
themes. These efforts are demanded by the nature of the things themselves.

Foreword to the second edition 269

One who is not afraid, will ﬁnd sufﬁcient opportunity for improving on
my positions and, if he cares to, for censuring their imperfections. Only if
he entrenches himself in a superﬁcial reading drawn from an extraphenomenological sphere of thought, will he refuse to attempt this, if he is
not to be disavowed by all who truly understand the matter. How readily
many authors employ critical rejections, with what conscientiousness they
read my writings, what nonsense they have the audacity to attribute to
me and to phenomenology, are shown in the Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre of
Moritz Schlick. On page 121 of this work it is said that my Ideas ‘asserts
the existence of a peculiar intuition, that is not a real psychical act, and that
if someone fails to ﬁnd such an “experience”, which does not fall within the
domain of psychology, this indicates that he has not understood the doctrine,
that he has not yet penetrated to the correct attitude of experience and
thought, for this requires “peculiar, strenuous studies” ’. The total impossibility that I should have been able to utter so insane an assertion as that
attributed to me by Schlick in the above italicized sentences, and the falsity
of the rest of his exposition of the meaning of phenomenology, must be
plain to anyone familiar with this meaning. Of course I have always repeated my demand for ‘strenuous studies’. But not otherwise than, e.g., the
mathematician demands them of anyone who wishes to share in talk of
mathematical matters, or who even presumes to criticize the value of mathematical science. In any case, to devote less study to a doctrine than is
necessary to master its meaning, and yet to criticize it, surely violates the
eternal laws of the literary conscience. No amount of learning in natural
science or psychology or historical philosophies, will make it unnecessary to
make these efforts in penetrating into phenomenology, or can do more than
lighten them. Everyone, however, who has made these efforts, and who has
risen to a very seldom exercised lack of prejudice, has achieved an indubitable certainty regarding the givenness of its scientiﬁc foundation and the
inherent justiﬁcation of the method demanded by it, a method which here, as
in other sciences, renders possible a common set of conceptually deﬁnite
work-problems, as well as deﬁnite decisions as to truth or falsehood. I must
expressly observe that, in the case of M. Schlick, one is not dealing with
irrelevant slips, but with sense-distorting substitutions on which all his criticism is built up.
After these words of defence, I must also observe, in regard to Section 111,
that I changed my position on the problem of the phenomenological interpretation of interrogative and optative sentences shortly after the ﬁrst edition of the work, and that there would be no place for small revisions, which
were all that could be undertaken at the time. The text therefore remained
unaltered. I could be less conservative as regards the much used Appendix
on ‘External and Internal Perception’. Though the text’s essential content
has been preserved, it now appears in a considerably improved form.

270 Foreword to the second edition

The desideratum of an Index for the whole work could unfortunately not
be realized, since my promising pupil, Dr Rudolf Clemens, who had undertaken to prepare it, had died for his country.
. 
Freiburg-im-Breisgau, October 1920

Investigation VI

Elements of a
phenomenological
elucidation of knowledge

HH

Introduction

Our last Investigation may have seemed at ﬁrst to lose itself in remote
questions of descriptive psychology: it has, however, been of considerable
help in our attempted elucidation of knowledge. All thought, and in particular all theoretical thought and knowledge, is carried on by way of certain
‘acts’, which occur in a context of expressive discourse. In these acts lies the
source of all those unities-of-validity which confront the thinker as objects
of thought and knowledge, or as the explanatory grounds and principles,
the theories or sciences of the latter. In these acts, therefore, lies the source,
also, of the pure, universal Ideas connected with such objects, whose ideally
governed combinations pure logic attempts to set forth, and whose elucidation is the supreme aim of epistemological criticism. Plainly we shall have
gone far in our elucidation of knowledge, once we have established the
phenomenological peculiarities of acts as such, that much debated, little
understood class of experiences. By putting our logical experiences into this
class, we shall have taken an important step towards the demarcation of
an analysis which will ‘make sense’ of the logical sphere and of the fundamental concepts which concern knowledge. In the course of our Investigation we were led to distinguish various concepts of content which tend to
become confusedly mixed up whenever acts, and the ideal unities pertaining
to acts, are in question. Differences which had already struck us in our First
Investigation, in the narrower context of meanings and of acts conferring
meaning, appeared once more in a wider context and in the most general
forms. Even the highly noteworthy notion of content, that of ‘intentional
essence’, which emerged as a novel gain from our last Investigation, was
not without this relation to the logical sphere: for the same series of identities, previously employed to illustrate the unity of meaning, now yielded,
suitably generalized, a certain identity, that of ‘intentional essence’, which
applied to all acts whatsoever. By thus linking up, or subordinating, the
ideal unities and phenomenological characters of the logical realm, to the
quite general characters and unities of the sphere of acts, we importantly
deepened our phenomenological and critical understanding of the former.

274 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

The investigations carried out in the last chapter, basing themselves on
the distinction of act-quality and act-material within the unity of intentional
essence, again led us far into the zone of logical interest. We were forced to
enquire into the relation of such intentional material to the presentational
foundation essential to every act, and were compelled to hold apart several
important, constantly confounded concepts of presentation, and so to work
out a fundamental part of the ‘theory of judgement’. Here as elsewhere a
vast amount remains to be done: we have barely made a beginning.
We have not yet even been successful in our more immediate task, that of
laying bare the source of the Idea of Meaning. Undeniably and importantly,
the meaning of expressions must lie in the intentional essence of the relevant
acts, but we have not at all considered the sorts of acts that can thus function in meaning, and whether all types of acts may not be in this respect
on a level. But when we seek to tackle this question, we at once encounter –
as the next paragraphs will demonstrate – the relation between meaningintention and meaning-fulﬁlment, or to speak traditionally, and in fact
ambiguously, the relation between ‘concept’ or ‘thought’ on the one hand,
understood as mere meaning without intuitive fulﬁlment, and ‘corresponding intuition’, on the other.
It is most important that this distinction, touched on even in our First
Investigation, should be most minutely explored. In carrying out the appropriate analyses and, in the ﬁrst instance, attaching them to the simplest
naming-intentions, we at once perceive that our whole treatment calls for a
natural extension and general circumscription. The widest class of acts, in
which we meet with distinctions between intention and intention-fulﬁlment
(or intention-frustration), extends far beyond the logical sphere. This is
itself demarcated by a peculiarity in the relation of fulﬁlment. A class of acts
– those known as ‘objectifying’ – are in fact marked off from all others, in
that the fulﬁlment-syntheses appropriate to their sphere have the character
of knowings, of identiﬁcations, of a ‘putting-together’ of things congruent,
while their syntheses of frustration, similarly, have the correlative character
of a setting apart of things conﬂicting. Within this widest sphere of
objectifying acts, we shall have to study all the relations relevant to the unity
of knowledge. We shall not have to limit ourselves to the fulﬁlment of
such peculiar meaning-intentions as attach to our verbal expressions, since
similar intentions also turn up without grammatical support. Our intuitions, further, themselves mostly have the character of intentions, which
both require, and very often sustain a further fulﬁlment.
We shall provide a phenomenological characterization of the quite general notions of signiﬁcation and intuition in relation to the phenomena of
fulﬁlment, and we shall pursue the analysis of various sorts of intuition,
starting with sensuous intuition, an enquiry basic to the elucidation of knowledge. We shall then embark upon the phenomenology of the varying
degrees of knowledge, giving clearness and deﬁnite form to a related series

Introduction 275

of fundamental epistemological concepts. Here certain novel notions of content, barely glanced at in our previous analyses, will take the centre of the
stage: the concept of intuitive content and the concept of representing (interpreted) content. We shall range the notion of epistemic essence alongside of
our previous notion of intentional essence, and within the former we shall
draw a distinction between intentional quality and intentional matter, the
latter being divided into interpretative sense, interpretative form and interpreted (apperceived, or representing) content. We shall thereby pin down
the concept of Interpretation (Auffassung) or Representation, as the unity of
material and representing content by way of interpretative form.
In connection with the graded transition from intention to fulﬁlment,
we shall recognize distinctions of greater or less mediacy in an intention
itself, which exclude straightforward fulﬁlment, and which require rather a
graded sequence of fulﬁlments: this will lead to an understanding of the allimportant, hitherto unclariﬁed sense of talk about ‘indirect presentations’.
We then follow up the differences of greater or lesser adequacy of intention
to the intuitive experiences which fuse with it, and which fulﬁl it in knowledge, and point to the case of an objectively complete adequacy of the one
to the others. In this connection we strive towards an ultimate phenomenological clariﬁcation of the concepts of Possibility and Impossibility (harmony,
compatibility – conﬂict, incompatibility), and of the ideal axioms relating to
these. Bringing back into consideration the act-qualities that we have for a
while neglected, we then deal with the distinction, applicable to thetic acts,
of a provisional and a ﬁnal fulﬁlment. This ﬁnal fulﬁlment represents an ideal
of perfection. It always consists in a corresponding percept (we of course
take for granted a necessary widening of the notion of perception beyond
the bounds of sense). The synthesis of fulﬁlment achieved in this limiting
case is self-evidence or knowledge in the pregnant sense of the word. Here we
have being in the sense of truth, ‘correspondence’ rightly understood, the
adaequatio rei ac intellectus: here this adaequatio is itself given, to be directly
seized and gazed upon. The varying notions of truth, which all must be built
up on one single, selfsame phenomenological situation, here reach complete
clearness. The same holds of the correlative ideal of imperfection and therefore of the case of absurdity, and as regards the ‘conﬂict’ and the non-being,
experienced therewith, of falsehood.
The natural course of our Investigation, which at ﬁrst only concerns itself
with such intentions as are meanings, has as a consequence that our treatments all begin with the simplest meanings, and in so doing abstract from
formal differences among such meanings. The complementary Investigations
of our Second Section will then make these differences their main theme,
and will at once lead to a totally new concept of matter or material, to a basic
contrast between sensuous stuff and categorial form or – abandoning an
objective for a phenomenological stance – to a contrast between sensuous
and categorial acts. In close connection with this last, we have the important

276 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

distinction between sensuous (real) and categorial objects, determinations,
combinations etc., regarding which last it becomes clear that they can only
be ‘perceptually’ given in acts which are founded upon other acts, and in the
last resort, on acts of sensibility. In general we may say that the intuitive,
and accordingly likewise the imaginative, fulﬁlment of categorial acts, is
founded on acts of sense. Mere sense, however, never fulﬁls categorial acts,
or intentions which include categorial forms: fulﬁlment lies rather, in every
case, in a sensibility structured by categorial acts. With this goes an unavoidable extension of the originally sense-turned concepts of intuition and perception, which permits us to speak of categorial and, in particular, of universal
intuition. The distinction between sensuous and purely categorial abstraction
then leads to a distinction between sensuous concepts and categories. The
old epistemological contrast between sensibility and understanding achieves
a much-needed clarity through a distinction between straightforward or
sensuous, and founded or categorial intuition. The same is true of the contrast between thinking and seeing (intuiting), which confuses philosophical
parlance by confounding the relations of signiﬁcation to fulﬁlling intuition,
on the one hand, with the relations of sensuous and categorial acts, on
the other. All talk of logical form concerns what is purely categorial in the
meanings and meaning-fulﬁlments in question. But the ‘matter’ of logic, the
‘intention’ of terms, itself admits, through a graded superimposition of
categorial intentions, of distinctions of matter and form, so that the logical
antithesis of matter and form points the way to a readily understandable
‘relativization’ of our absolute distinction.
We shall end the main body of this Investigation by discussing the factors
which limit freedom in the actual categorial shaping of given matter. We
shall become aware of the analytic rules of authentic thinking which, grounded
in pure categories, do not depend on the speciﬁcity of their materials. Similar factors limit thought in the inauthentic sense, i.e. pure acts of meaning to
the extent that they might lend themselves to authentic cases of expression,
resting on a priori principles and not dependent on subject-matters to be
expressed. From this demand springs the function of the laws of authentic
thinking to provide norms for our acts of mere meaning.
We raised a question at the beginning of this Investigation as to the
natural circumscription of sense-giving and sense-fulﬁlling acts: this is
answered by ranging such acts under objectifying acts, and by subdividing
the latter into acts of signiﬁcation and acts of intuition. Having successfully
clariﬁed the phenomenological relations which concern fulﬁlment, we are at
last in a position to evaluate the arguments for, and the arguments against,
Aristotle’s view of optative and imperative sentences as special cases of predication. The last section of the present Investigation is devoted to clearing
up this controversial issue.
The aims just sketched are not the ﬁnal, highest aims of a phenomenological
elucidation of knowledge in general. Our analyses, comprehensive as they

Introduction 277

are, leave untilled the extremely fruitful ﬁeld of mediate thought and knowledge: the nature of mediate evidence, and of its correlated idealia, remains
insufﬁciently illuminated. We consider, however, that our aims have not
been too trivial, and we hope that we may have dug down to the genuinely
ﬁrst, underlying foundations of a critique of knowledge. Even such a critique demands of us an exercise of the modesty essential to all strict, scientiﬁc research. If this last aims at a real, full completion of the tasks at hand,
if it has given up the dream of solving the great problems of knowledge by
merely criticizing traditional philosophemes assertions or by probable argumentation, if it has at last seen that matters can be advanced and transformed only by getting to close grips with them, it must then also reconcile
itself to tackling the problems of knowledge, not in their higher or their
highest, and therefore their most interesting developments, but in their comparatively simplest forms, in the lowest grades of development accessible to
us. That even such a modest epistemological enquiry has vastly many difﬁculties to surmount, that it has in fact still got all its achievements ahead of
it, will become clear in the course of the ensuing analyses.

HH

First Section

Objectifying intentions and
their fulfilments: knowledge as
a synthesis of fulfilment and
its gradations

HH

Chapter 1

Meaning-intention and
meaning-fulﬁlment

§1 Whether every type of mental act, or only certain
types, can function as carriers of meaning
We shall now go on with the question raised in our Introduction: whether
meaning-something is exclusively the prerogative of certain restricted sorts
of mental acts. It might seem at ﬁrst plain that no such restrictions can exist,
and that any and every act might operate in sense-giving fashion. For it
seems plain that we can verbally express acts of every kind – whether presentations, judgements, surmises, questions, wishes etc. – and that, when we
do this, they yield us the meanings of the forms of speech in question, the
meanings of names, of statements, of interrogative or optative sentences etc.
The opposite view can, however, lay claim to the same obviousness, particularly in a form that restricts meanings to a single, narrow class of acts.
All acts are certainly expressible, if language is sufﬁciently rich, each has its
own appropriate speech-form: sentence-forms, e.g., differentiate themselves
into indicative, interrogative, imperative etc., and among the ﬁrst of these
we have categorical, hypothetical, disjunctive and other sentence-forms. In
each case the act, in so far as it achieves expression in this or that speechform, must be known for the sort of act it is, the question as a question, the
wish as a wish, the judgement as a judgement etc. This will apply also to the
partial acts constitutive of such acts, in so far as these too are expressed.
Acts cannot, it seems, ﬁnd their own appropriate expressive forms till their
form and content have been apperceived and known. The expressive role
in speech lies, accordingly, not in mere words, but in expressive acts: these
create for the correlated acts to be expressed by them a new expressive
material in which they can be given thinking expression, the general essence
of which constitutes the meaning of the speech-form in question.
A striking conﬁrmation of this view seems to lie in the possibility of a
purely symbolic functioning of expressions. The mental ( geistige) expression, the thinking counterpart of the act to be expressed, attaches to the
verbal expression, and can be brought to life by the latter even when the act
itself is not performed by the person who understands the expression. We

282 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

understand the expression of an act of perception without ourselves perceiving anything, of a question without ourselves asking anything etc. We
experience more than the mere words, we enjoy the thought-forms or the
expressions. In the opposed case, where the intended acts are themselves
actually present, the expression comes to coincidence with what it has to
express, the meaning which clings to the words ﬁts itself into what it means,
its thought-intention ﬁnds in the latter its fulﬁlling intuition.
It is plainly in close connection with these opposed viewpoints that we
have the old dispute as to whether or not the peculiar forms of interrogative, optative, imperative and similar sentences are to count as statements,
and their meanings as judgements. Aristotle’s doctrine places the meaning of
all complete sentences in the varied array of psychic experiences, experiences
of judging, wishing, commanding and so forth. As against this, another more
modern and increasingly inﬂuential doctrine locates meaning exclusively in
our judgements (or in their purely presentative modiﬁcations). An interrogative sentence in a sense expresses a question, but only in so far as this
question is realized to be a question, in so far as it is referred in thought to
a speaker, and so judged to be his experience. And so similarly in other
cases. Each meaning is, on this view, either a name-meaning or a propositional
meaning, i.e. either the meaning of a complete indicative sentence or a possible
part of such a meaning. Indicative sentences are here to be understood as
predicative sentences, since judgements are, on this view, generally thought
of as predicative acts: we shall see, however, that the controversy still has a
sense even when judgements are looked on as positing acts in general.
To ﬁnd the right stance towards the questions here raised would call for
more exact discussion than the above, superﬁcial argumentations have attempted. It will become plain, when we look at the matter more closely, that
the appeals to sheer obviousness on one side or the other conceal obscurity
and even error.

§2 That all acts may be expressed does not decide
the issue. There are two senses to talk about
expressing an act
All acts it has been agreed are expressible. This cannot, of course, be
questioned, but it does not therefore follow, as might be surreptitiously
suggested, that all acts for that reason also function as carriers of meaning.
Talk of ‘expressing’ is, as we argued earlier,1 ambiguous, and it remains so
even when we connect it with the acts to be expressed. What are expressed
may be, on the one hand, said to be the sense-giving acts, to which, in the
narrower sense, ‘voice’ is given. But there are other acts which can also be
said to be expressed, though this is the case, naturally, in a different sense. I
refer here to the very frequent cases in which we name acts we are now experiencing, and through such naming manage to say that we are experiencing

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 283

them. In this sense I ‘express’ a wish through the words ‘I wish that . . .’, a
question through the words ‘I am asking whether . . .’, a judgement through
the words ‘I judge that . . .’, and so on. Naturally we can pass judgement on
our own inner experiences just as we can pass judgement on outward things
and, when we do the former, the meanings of the relevant sentences will
reside in our judgements upon such experiences, and not in the experiences
themselves, our wishes, questions etc. Just so, the meanings of statements
about external things do not reside in these things (the horses, houses etc.),
but in the judgements we inwardly pass upon them (or in the presentations
that help to build up such judgements). That the objects judged about in
one case transcend consciousness (or purport to do so), in another case are
taken to be immanent in consciousness, makes no real difference. Naturally
when I express the wish that now ﬁlls me, it is concretely one with my act of
judgement, but it does not really contribute to the latter. The wish is apprehended in an act of reﬂex perception, subsumed under the concept of wishing, and named by way of this concept and of the further determining
presentation of the wish-content. Thus the conceptual presentation makes
the same sort of direct contribution to the judgement about the wish (and
the corresponding wish-name to the wish-statement), that the presentation
of Man makes to a judgement about Man (or the name ‘Man’ to a statement about Man). Substitute for the subject word ‘I’ in the sentence ‘I wish
that . . .’ the relevant proper name, and the sense of the sentence remains
unaffected in its remaining parts. It is, however, undeniable that the wishstatement can now be understood without change of sense by someone who
hears it, and can be imitatively re-judged by him, even though he does not
share the wish at all. We see, therefore, that, even when a wish chances to
form a unity with an act of judgement directed upon it, it does not really
form part of the meaning of the latter. A truly sense-giving experience can
never be absent if the living sense of the expression is to survive change.
It becomes clear, therefore, that the expressibility of all acts is without
relevance to the question whether all acts can function in sense-giving fashion,
so far, that is, as such ‘expressibility’ means no more than the possibility of
making certain statements about such acts. For in this connection acts are
just not functioning as carriers of meaning at all.

§3 A third sense of talk about the ‘expression’ of
acts. Formulation of our theme
We have just distinguished two senses in which there can be talk about ‘acts
expressed’. Either they are acts in which the sense, the meaning of the relevant expression is constituted, or they are acts that the speaker attributes
to himself as items in his recent experience. This latter conception may be
appropriately widened. Plainly the situation that it covers would not differ
in any essential respect, were an expressed act not to be attributed to the

284 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

experiencing ego, but to other objects, and it would not differ for any conceivable form of expression that really (reell) named this act as something
experienced, even if it did not do it so as to mark the act off as the subjector object-member of a predication. The main point is that the act, whether
directly named or otherwise ‘expressed’, should appear as the actually present
object of discourse (or of the objectifying, positing activity behind discourse),
whereas this is not the case in regard to our sense-giving acts.
There is a third sense of the same talk of ‘expression’ in which we deal, as
in our second sense, with a judgement or other objectiﬁcation related to the
acts in question, but not with a judgement about the latter – not, therefore,
with an objectiﬁcation of these acts by way of presentations and namingacts which refer to them; we have rather a judgement grounded upon such
acts, which does not demand their objectiﬁcation. That I express my percept
of something may, e.g., mean that I attribute this or that content to it: it
may also mean that I derive my judgement from my percept, that I do not
merely assert but also perceive the matter of fact in question, and that I
assert it as I perceive it. My judgement is not here concerned with the
perceiving but with the thing perceived. By ‘judgements of perception’ tout
court we generally mean judgements belonging to this last class.
In a similar manner we can give expression to other intuitive acts, whether
imaginings, remembering or expectations.
In the case of utterances grounded on imagination we may indeed doubt
whether a genuine judgement is present: it is in fact plain that this is not then
present. We are here thinking of cases where we allow our imagination
to ‘run away’ with us, and where we employ ordinary statements, appropriate to things perceived, in giving a name to what then appears to us, or of
the narrative form in which story-tellers, novelists etc., ‘express’, not real
circumstances, but the creations of their artistic fancy. As we saw in our last
Investigation, we are here dealing with conformably modiﬁed acts which
serve as counterparts which correspond to the actual judgements that might
be expressed in the same words, just as intuitive imaginations correspond to
perceptions, and perhaps also to rememberings and expectations. We shall
leave aside all such distinctions for the present.
In connection with the above class of cases, and in connection with the
thereby deﬁned new sense of ‘expressed act’, we wish to make clear the whole
relation between meaning and expressed intuition. We wish to consider
whether such an intuition may not itself be the act constitutive of meaning,
or if this is not the case, how the relation between them may be best understood and systematically classiﬁed. We are now heading towards a more
general question: Do the acts which give expression in general, and the acts
which in general are capable of receiving expression, belong to essentially
different spheres, and thereby to ﬁrmly delimited act-species? And do they
nonetheless take their tone from an overarching, unifying genus of acts, in
which all acts capable of functioning ‘meaningfully’, in the widest sense of the

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 285

word – whether as meanings proper, or as ‘fulﬁlments’ of meanings – can be
brought together and set apart, so that all other genera of acts can eo ipso, in
law-governed fashion, be excluded from such functions? This, we may say, is
the immediate aim of our Investigation. And as our considerations advance,
there will be an obvious widening of our sphere of treatment so as to render
self-evident the relation of the questions here raised to a general ‘sensemaking’ of knowledge. New and higher aims will then enter our ﬁeld of view.

§4 The expression of a percept (‘judgement of
perception’). Its meaning cannot lie in perception,
but must lie in peculiar expressive acts
Let us consider an example. I have just looked out into the garden and now
give expression to my percept in the words: ‘There ﬂies a blackbird!’ What is
here the act in which my meaning resides? I think we may say, in harmony
with points established in our First Investigation, that it does not reside in
perception, at least not in perception alone. It seems plain that we cannot
describe the situation before us as if there were nothing else in it – apart
from the sound of the words – which decides the meaningfulness of the
expression, but the percept to which it attaches. For we could base different
statements on the same percept, and thereby unfold quite different senses. I
could, e.g., have remarked: ‘That is black!’, ‘That is a black bird!’, ‘There
ﬂies that black bird!’, ‘There it soars!’, and so forth. And conversely, the
sound of my words and their sense might have remained the same, though
my percept varied in a number of ways. Every chance alteration of the
perceiver’s relative position alters his percept, and different persons, who
perceive the same object simultaneously, never have exactly the same percepts. No such differences are relevant to the meaning of a perceptual statement. One may at times pay special attention to them, but one’s statement
will then be correspondingly different.
One might, however, maintain that this objection only showed meaning
to be unaffected by such differences in individual percepts: it might still be
held to reside in something common to the whole multitude of perceptual
acts which centre in a single object.
To this we reply, that percepts may not only vary, but may also vanish
altogether, without causing an expression to lose all its meaning. A listener
may understand my words, and my sentence as a whole, without looking
into the garden: conﬁdent in my veracity, he may bring forth the same
judgement without the percept. Possibly he is helped by an imaginative
re-enactment, but perhaps this too is absent, or occurs in so mutilated, so
inadequate a form, as to be no ﬁt counterpart of what appears perceptually,
at least not in respect of the features ‘expressed’ in my statement.
But if the sense of a statement survives the elimination of perception, and
is the same sense as before, we cannot suppose that perception is the act in

286 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

which the sense of a perceptual statement, its expressive intention, is achieved.
The acts which are united with the sound of our words are phenomenologically quite different according as these words have a purely symbolic,
or an intuitively fulﬁlled signiﬁcance, or according as they have a merely
fancied or a perceptually realizing basis: we cannot believe that signiﬁcation
is now achieved in this sort of act, and now in that. We shall rather have to
conceive that the function of meaning pertains in all cases to one and the
same sort of act, a type of act free from the limitations of the perception or
the imagination which so often fail us, and which, in all cases where an expression authentically ‘expresses’, merely becomes one with the act expressed.
It remains, of course, incontestable that, in ‘judgements of perception’,
perception is internally related to our statements’ sense. We have good reason
to say: the statement expresses the percept, i.e. brings out what is perceptually
‘given’. The same percept may serve as a foundation for several statements,
but, however the sense of such statements may vary, it addresses itself to the
phenomenal content of perception. It is now one, now another, part of our
uniﬁed, total percept – a part, no doubt, in a non-independent, attributive
sense – which gives our judgement its speciﬁc basis, without thereby becoming the true carrier of its meaning, as the possibility of eliminating percepts
has just shown us.
We must accordingly say: This ‘expression’ of percept – more objectively
phrased, of a perceived thing as such – is no affair of the sound of words, but
of certain expressive acts. ‘Expression’ in this context means verbal expression informed with its full sense, which is here put in a certain relation to
perception, through which relation the latter is in its turn said to be ‘expressed’. This means, at the same time, that between percept and sound of
words another act (or pattern of acts) is intercalated. I call it an act, since
the expressive experience, whether or not accompanied by a percept, always
has an intentional direction to something objective. This mediating act must
be the true giver of meaning, must pertain to the signiﬁcantly functioning
expression as its essential constituent, and must determine its possession of
an identical sense, whether or not this is associated with a conﬁrming percept.
The rest of our investigation will show ever more clearly that our conception is workable.

§5 Continuation. Perception as an act which
determines meaning, without embodying it
We can go no further without discussing a doubt which crops up at this
point. Our treatment seems to demand a deﬁnite narrowing down: it
appears to cover more than can be fully justiﬁed. If perception never constitutes the full meaning of a statement grounded on perception, it seems
nonetheless to make a contribution to this meaning, and to do so in cases of
the sort just dealt with. This will become clearer if we slightly modify our

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 287

example, and instead of speaking quite indeﬁnitely of a blackbird, proceed
to speak of this blackbird. ‘This’ is an essentially occasional expression which
only becomes fully signiﬁcant when we have regard to the circumstances
of utterance, in this case to an actually performed percept. The perceived
object, as it is given in perception, is what the word ‘this’ signiﬁes. The
present tense in the grammatic form of a verb likewise expresses a relation
to what is actually present, and so again to perception. Plainly the same
holds of our original example: to say ‘There ﬂies a blackbird’ is not to say
that some blackbird in general is ﬂying by, but that a blackbird is ﬂying by
here and now.
It is clear, of course, that the meaning in question is not attached to the
word-sound of ‘this’; it does not belong among the meanings ﬁrmly and
generally bound up with this word. We must, however, allow that the sense
of a uniﬁed statement is to be found in the total act of meaning which in a
given case underlies it – whether or not this may be completely expressed
through the universal meanings of its words. It seems, therefore, that we
must allow that perception contributes to the signiﬁcant content of a judgement, in all cases where such perception gives intuitive presence to the fact
to which our statement gives judgemental expression. It is of course a contribution that can perhaps also be made by other acts, in an essentially
similar manner. The listener does not perceive the garden, but he is perhaps
acquainted with it, has an intuitive idea of it, places the imagined blackbird
and reported event in it, and so, through the mere picture-work of fantasy,
achieves an understanding which follows the intention and which agrees in
sense with the speaker’s.
The situation permits, however, of another reading. Intuition may indeed
be allowed to contribute to the meaning of a perceptual statement, but only
in the sense that the meaning could not acquire a determinate relation to the
object it means without some intuitive aid. But this does not imply that the
intuitive act is itself a carrier of meaning, or that it really makes contributions to this meaning, contributions discoverable among the constituents of
the completed meaning. Genuinely occasional expressions have no doubt a
meaning which varies from case to case, but in all such changes a common
element is left over, which distinguishes their ambiguity from that of a casual
equivocation.2 The addition of intuition has as effect that this common
element of meaning, indeterminate in its abstraction, can determine itself.
Intuition in fact gives it complete determinateness of objective reference,
and thereby its last difference. This achievement does not entail that a part
of the meaning must itself lie in the intuitive sphere.
I say ‘this’, and now mean the paper lying before me. Perception is responsible for the relation of my word to this object, but my meaning does
not lie in perception. When I say ‘this’, I do not merely perceive, but a new
act of pointing (of this-meaning) builds itself on my perception, an act directed
upon the latter and dependent on it, despite its difference. In this pointing

288 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

reference, and in it alone, our meaning resides. Without a percept – or some
correspondingly functioning act – the pointing would be empty, without
deﬁnite differentiation, impossible in the concrete. For of course the indeterminate thought of the speaker as pointing to something – which the hearer
may entertain before he knows what object we wish to indicate by our ‘this’
– is not the thought we enact in the actual pointing, with which the determinate thought of the thing pointed to has been merely associated. One
should not confuse the general character of actual pointing as such with the
indeﬁnite presentation of ‘a certain’ act of pointing.
Perception accordingly realizes the possibility of an unfolding of my act of
this-meaning with its deﬁnite relation to the object, e.g. to this paper before
my eyes. But it does not, on our view, itself constitute this meaning, nor
even part of it.
In so far as the act-character of a pointing act is oriented to intuition, it
achieves a deﬁniteness of intention which fulﬁls itself in intuition, in accordance with a general feature of acts which may be called their intentional
essence. For a pointing reference remains the same, whichever out of a
multitude of mutually belonging percepts may underlie it, in all of which
the same, and recognizably the same, object appears. The meaning of ‘this’
is again the same when, instead of a percept, some act from our range of
imaginative presentation is substituted for it, an act presenting the same
object through a picture in a recognizably identical manner. It changes,
however, when intuitions from other perceptual or imaginative spheres are
substituted. We are once more referring to a this, but the general character
of the reference which obtains here, that of direct, attributively unmediated
aiming at an object, is otherwise differentiated: the intention to another
object attaches to it, just as physical pointing becomes spatially different
with each change in spatial direction.
We hold, therefore, that perception is an act which determines, but does
not embody meaning. This view is conﬁrmed by the fact that essentially
occasional expressions like ‘this’ can often be used and understood without
an appropriate intuitive foundation. Once the intention to an object has
been formed on a suitable intuitive basis, it can be revived and exactly
reproduced without the help of a suitable act of perception or imagination.
Genuinely occasional expressions are accordingly much like proper names,
in so far as the latter function with their authentic meaning. For a proper
name also names an object ‘directly’. It refers to it, not attributively, as the
bearer of these or those properties, but without such ‘conceptual’ mediation,
as what it itself is, just as perception might set it before our eyes. The
meaning of a proper name lies accordingly in a direct reference-to-thisobject, a reference that perception only fulﬁls, as imagination does provisionally and illustratively, but which is not identical with these intuitive acts.
It is just in this manner that perception gives an object to the word ‘this’
(where it is directed to objects of possible perception): our reference to ‘this’

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 289

is fulﬁlled in perception, but is not perception itself. And naturally the
meaning of both types of directly naming expressions has an intuitive origin,
from which their naming intentions ﬁrst orient themselves towards an
individual object. In other respects they are different. As ‘this’ is infected
with the thought of a pointing, it imports (as we showed) a mediation and
a complication, i.e. a peculiar form absent from the proper name. The proper
name also belongs as a ﬁxed appellation to its object; to this constant pertinence corresponds something in the manner of its relation to that object.
This is shown in the fact of our knowing a person or thing by name, as
something called so-and-so: I know Hans as Hans, Berlin as Berlin. We
have, in our treatment, no doubt ignored the case of all those proper names
which are signiﬁcant in derivative fashion. When proper names have once
been formed in direct application (and so on a basis of intuitions which give
things to us), we can, by employing the concept of ‘being called’, itself
formed by reﬂection on the use of proper names, give proper names to
objects, or take cognizance of their proper names, even though such objects
are not directly given or known to us, but are only described indirectly as
the bearers of certain properties. The capital of Spain, e.g., is called (i.e. has
the proper name) ‘Madrid ’. A person unacquainted with the town Madrid
itself, thereby achieves both knowledge of its name and the power to name
it correctly, and yet not thereby the individual meaning of the word ‘Madrid’.
Instead of the direct reference, which only an actual seeing of the city could
arouse, he must make do with an indirect pointing to this reference, operating through characteristic ideas of properties and the conception of ‘being
called’ such and such.
If we may trust our arguments, we must not only draw a general distinction between the perceptual and the signiﬁcant element in the statement of
perception; we must also locate no part of the meaning in the percept itself.
The percept, which presents the object, and the statement which, by way of the
judgement (or by the thought-act inwoven into the unity of the judgement)
thinks and expresses it, must be rigorously kept apart, even though, in the case
of the perceptual judgement now being considered, they stand to each other in
the most intimate relation of mutual coincidence, or in the unity of fulﬁlment.
We need not dwell on the fact that a like result applies also to other
intuitive judgements, and thus also to statements which, in a sense analogous to that which applies to perceptual judgements, ‘express’ the intuitive
content of an imagination, a remembering, an expectation etc.
Addendum. In the exposition of §26 of Investigation I we began with the
understanding of the hearer, and drew a distinction between the ‘indicating’
(anzeigende) and the ‘indicated’ (angezeigte) meaning of an essentially occasional expression and, in particular, of the word ‘this’. For the hearer, in
whose momentary ﬁeld of vision the thing that we wish to point out is
perhaps not present, only this indeﬁnitely general thought is at ﬁrst aroused:

290 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

Something is being pointed out. Only when a presentation is added (an
intuitive presentation if the thing dealt with demands an intuitive pointing
out), is a deﬁnite reference constituted for him, and so a full, authentic
meaning for the demonstrative pronoun. For the speaker there is no such
sequence: he has no need of the indeﬁnitely referential idea which functions
as ‘index’ for the hearer. Not the idea of an indication, but an indication
itself, is given in his case, and it is eo ipso determinately directed thingward:
from the ﬁrst the speaker enjoys the ‘indicated’ meaning, and enjoys it in a
presentative intention immediately oriented towards intuition. If the thing
meant cannot be intuitively picked out, as in a reference to a theorem in a
mathematical proof, the conceptual thought in question plays the part of
an intuition: the indicative intuition could derive fulﬁlment from an actual
re-living of this past thought. In each case we observe a duplicity in the
indicative intention: the character of the indication seems in the ﬁrst case to
espouse the directly objective intention, as a result of which we have an intention directed upon a deﬁnite object that we are intuiting here and now. Our
other case does not differ. If the previous conceptual thought is not now
being performed, an intention which corresponds to it survives in memory;
this attaches itself to the act-character of the indication, thereby lending it
deﬁniteness of direction.
What we have just said about indicating and indicated meaning can have
two meanings. It can mean (1) the two mutually resolving thoughts which
characterize the hearer’s successive understanding: ﬁrst the indeterminate
idea of something or other referred to by ‘this’, then the act of deﬁnitely
directed indication into which a completing presentation transforms it. In
the latter act we have the indicated, in the former the indicating meaning.
(2) If we conﬁne ourselves to the complete, deﬁnitely directed indication
which the speaker has from the beginning, we can again see something
double about it: the general character of indication as such, and the feature
which determines this, which narrows it down to an indication of ‘this thing
there’. The former can again be called an indicating meaning, or rather the
indicating element in the indissoluble unity of meaning, in so far as it is
what the hearer can immediately grasp by virtue of its expressive generality,
and can use to indicate what is referred to. If I say ‘this’, the hearer at least
knows that something is being pointed at. (Just so in the case of other
essentially occasional expressions. If I say ‘here’, I have to do with something in my nearer or further spatial environment, etc.) On the other hand,
the true aim of my talk lies not in this general element, but in the direct
intending of the object in question. Towards it and its fulness of content I
am directed, and these empty generalities do little or nothing towards determining the latter. In this sense a direct intention is the primary, indicated
meaning.
This second distinction is the one laid down by our deﬁnition in our
previous exposition. (Inv. I, §26). The distinctions achieved in this section,

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 291

and our much clearer treatment, will probably have helped towards a further clariﬁcation of this difﬁcult matter.

§6 The static unity of expressive thought and
expressed intuition. Recognition (das Erkennen)
We shall now absorb ourselves in a closer investigation of the relations holding among intuitive acts, on the one hand, and expressive acts, on the other.
We shall conﬁne ourselves, in the present section entirely, to the range of the
simplest possible cases, and so naturally to expressions and signiﬁcant intentions which belong to the sphere of naming. We shall make, for the rest, no
claim to treat this ﬁeld exhaustively. We are concerned with nominal expressions, which refer themselves in the most perspicuous of possible fashions to
‘corresponding’ percepts and other forms of intuition.
Let us ﬁrst glance in this ﬁeld at a relationship of static union, where a
sense-giving thought has based itself on intuition, and is thereby related to its
object. I speak, e.g., of my inkpot, and my inkpot also stands before me: I
see it. The name names the object of my percept, and is enabled to name it
by the signiﬁcant act which expresses its character and its form in the form
of the name. The relation between name and thing named, has, in this state
of union, a certain descriptive character, that we previously noticed: the
name ‘my inkpot’ seems to overlay the perceived object, to belong sensibly
to it. This belonging is of a peculiar kind. The words do not belong to the
objective context of physical thinghood that they express: in this context
they have no place, they are not referred to as something in or attaching to
the things that they name. If we turn to the experiences involved, we have,
on the one hand, as said before,3 the acts in which the words appear, on the
other hand, the similar acts in which the things appear. As regards the
latter, the inkpot confronts us in perception. Following our repeated demonstration of the descriptive essence of perception, this means no more
phenomenologically then that we undergo a certain sequence of experiences
of the class of sensations, sensuously uniﬁed in a peculiar serial pattern, and
informed by a certain act-character of ‘interpretation’ (Auffassung), which
endows it with an objective sense. This act-character is responsible for the
fact that an object, i.e. this inkpot, is perceptually apparent to us. In similar
fashion, the appearing word is constituted for us in an act of perception or
imaginative presentation.
Not word and inkpot, therefore, but the act-experiences just described, in
which they make their appearance, are here brought into relation: in these
word and inkpot appear, while yet being nothing whatever in the acts in
question. But how does this happen? What brings these acts into unity? The
answer seems clear. The relation, as one of naming, is mediated, not merely
by acts of meaning, but by acts of recognition (Erkennen), which are here
also acts of classiﬁcation. The perceived object is recognized for an inkpot,

292 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

known as one, and in so far as the act of meaning is most intimately one with
an act of classiﬁcation, and this latter, as recognition of the perceived object,
is again intimately one with the act of perception, the expression seems to be
applied to the thing and to clothe it like a garment.
Ordinarily we speak of recognizing and classifying the object of perception, as if our act busied itself with this object. But we have seen that there
is no object in the experience, only a perception, a thus and thus determinate mindedness (Zumutesein): the recognitive act in the experience must
accordingly base itself on the act of perception. One must not of course
misunderstand the matter, and raise the objection that we are putting the
matter as if perception was classiﬁed rather than its object. We are not
doing this at all. Such a performance would involve acts of a quite different,
much more complex constitution, expressible through expressions of corresponding complexity, e.g. ‘the perception of the inkpot’. It follows that the
recognitive experience of this thing as ‘my inkpot’, is nothing but a recognition which, in a deﬁnite and direct fashion, fuses an expressive experience,
on the one hand, with the relevant percept, on the other.
The same holds of cases in which picture-presentations serve in place of
percepts. The imaginatively apparent object, e.g. the identical inkpot in
memory or in fancy, is felt to bear the expression which names it. This
means, phenomenologically speaking, that a recognitive act in union with
an expressive experience is so related to an imaginative act as to be, in
objective parlance, spoken of as the recognition of an imaginatively presented object as, e.g., our inkpot. The imagined object, too, is absolutely nothing in our presentation of it, our experience is rather a certain blend of images,
fancied sensations, informed by a certain interpretative act-character. To
live through this act, and to have an imaginative presentation of the object,
are one and the same. If we therefore express the situation in the words ‘I
have before me an image, the image of an inkpot’, we have plainly coupled
new acts with our expressions and, in particular, a recognitive act which is
intimately one with our act of imagining.

§7 Recognition as a character of acts, and the
‘generality of words’
The following more exact argument would seem to show conclusively that,
in all cases where a name is applied to a thing intuitively given, we may
presume the presence of a recognitive act-character mediating between the
appearance of the word-sounds, on the one hand (or the complete senseinformed word), and the intuition of the thing on the other. One often hears
of the generality of words, and usually understands by this highly ambiguous phrase that a word is not bound to an individual intuition, but belongs
rather to an endless array of possible intuitions.
In what, however, does this belonging consist?

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 293

Let us deal with an extremely simple example, that of the name ‘red’. In
so far as it names an appearing object as red, it belongs to this object in
virtue of the moment of red that appears in this object. And each object that
bears a moment of like sort in itself, justiﬁes the same appellation: the same
name belongs to each, and does so by way of an identical sense.
But in what does this appellation by way of an identical sense consist?
We observe ﬁrst that the word does not attach externally, and merely
through hidden mental mechanisms, to the individual, speciﬁcally similar
traits of our intuitions. It is not enough, manifestly, to acknowledge the
bare fact that, wherever such and such an individual trait appears in our
intuition, the word also accompanies it as a mere pattern of sound. A mere
concomitance, a mere external going with or following on one another would
not forge any internal bond among them, and certainly not an intentional
bond. Yet plainly we have here such an intentional bond, and one of quite
peculiar phenomenological character. The word calls the red thing red. The
red appearing before us is what is referred to by the name, and is referred to
as ‘red ’. In this mode of naming reference, the name appears as belonging to
the named and as one with it.
On the other hand, however, the word has its sense quite apart from an
attachment to this intuition, and without attachment to any ‘corresponding’
intuition. Since this sense is everywhere the same, it is plain that it is not the
mere phoneme, rather the true, complete word, endowed on all occasions
with the constant character of its sense, that must be held to underlie the
naming relation. Even then it will not be enough to describe the union of
meaningful word and corresponding intuition in terms of mere concomitance. Take the word, present in consciousness and understood as a mere
symbol without being actually used to name anything, and set the corresponding intuition beside it: these two phenomena may at once, for genetic
reasons, be brought together in the phenomenological unity of naming.
Their mere togetherness is, however, not as yet this unity, which grows out
of it with plain novelty. It is conceivable, a priori, that no such unity should
emerge, that the coexistent phenomena should be phenomenologically
disjoined, that the object before us should not be the thing meant or named
by the meaningful word, and that the word should not belong to the object
as its name, and so name it.
Phenomenologically we ﬁnd before us no mere aggregate, but an intimate,
in fact intentional, unity: we can rightly say that the two acts, the one setting
up the complete word, and the other the thing, are intentionally combined
in a single unity of act. What here lies before us can be naturally described,
with equal correctness, by saying that the name ‘red’ calls the object red, or
that the red object is recognized (known) as red, and called ‘red’ as a result of
this recognition. To ‘call something red’ – in the fully actual sense of ‘calling’
which presupposes an underlying intuition of the thing so called – and to
‘recognize something as red’, are in reality synonymous expressions: they

294 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

only differ in so far as the latter brings out more clearly that we have here
no mere duality, but a unity engineered by a single act-character. In the
intimacy of this fusion, we must nonetheless admit, the various factors
implicit in our unity – the physical word-phenomenon with its ensouling
meaning, the aspect of recognition and the intuiting of what one names – do
not separate themselves off clearly, but our discussion compels us to presume them all to be there. We shall have more to say on this point later on.
It is plain that the recognitive character of certain acts, which gives them
their signiﬁcant relation to objects of intuition, does not pertain to words as
noises, but to words in their meaningful, their semantic (bedeutungsmässigen)
essence. Very different verbal sounds, e.g. the ‘same’ word in different languages, may involve an identical recognitive relation: the object is essentially
known for the same, though with the aid of quite different noises. Naturally
the complete recognition of something red, being equivalent to the actually
used name, must include the noise ‘red’ as a part. The members of different
speech-communities feel different verbal sounds to be ﬁtting, and include
these in the unity of ‘knowing something’. But the meaning attaching to such
words, and the recognitive act actually attaching this meaning to its object,
remains everywhere the same, so that these verbal differences are rightly
regarded as irrelevant.
The ‘generality of the word’ means, therefore, that the uniﬁed sense of
one and the same word covers (or, in the case of a nonsense-word, purports
to cover) an ideally delimited manifold of possible intuitions, each of which
could serve as the basis for an act of recognitive naming endowed with the
same sense. To the word ‘red’, e.g., corresponds the possibility of both
knowing as, and calling ‘red’, all red objects that might be given in possible
intuitions. This possibility leads on, with an a priori guarantee, to the further possibility of becoming aware, through an identifying synthesis of all
such naming recognitions, of a sameness of meaning of one with the other:
this A is red, and that A is the same, i.e. also red: the two intuited singulars
belong under the same ‘concept’.
A dubious point emerges here. We said above that a word could be understood even if not actually used to name anything. Must we not, however, grant
that a word must at least have the possibility of functioning as the actual name
of something and so of achieving an actual recognitive relation to corresponding intuition? Must we not say that without such a possibility it could
not be a word at all? The answer, of course, is that this possibility depends on
the possibility of the recognitions, the ‘knowings’, in question. Not all intended
knowing is possible, not all nominal meaning can be realized. ‘Imaginary’
names may be names, but they cannot actually be used to name anything, they
have, properly speaking, no extension, they are without generality in the sense
of the possible and the true. Their generality is empty pretension. But how these
last forms of speech are themselves to be made clear, what phenomenological
facts lie behind them, will be a matter for further investigation.

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 295

What we have said applies to all expressions, and not merely to such as
have generality of meaning in the manner of a class-concept. It applies also
to expressions having individual reference, such as proper names. The fact
spoken of as the ‘generality of verbal meaning’ does not point to the generality accorded to generic, as opposed to individual concepts, but, on the
contrary, embraces either indifferently. The ‘recognition’, the ‘knowing’, of
which we speak when a signiﬁcantly functioning expression encounters
corresponding intuition, must not, therefore, be conceived as an actual classiﬁcation, the ranging of an intuitively or cogitatively presented object in a
class, a ranging necessarily based on general concepts and verbally mediated
by general names. Proper names, too, have their generality, though, when
actually used to name anything, they can eo ipso not be said to classify it.
Proper names, like other names, cannot name anything, without thereby
also ‘knowing’ it. That their relation to corresponding intuition is, in fact,
as indirect as that of any other expression, can be shown by a treatment
exactly analogous to the one conducted above. Each and every name obviously belongs to no deﬁnite percept, nor to a deﬁnite imagination nor to any
other pictorial illustration. The same person can make his appearance in
countless possible intuitions, and all these appearances have no merely intuitive but also a recognitive unity. Each appearance from such an intuitive
manifold will justify a precisely synonymous use of the proper name. Whichever appearance is given, the man using the name means one and the same
person or thing. And he means this not merely in being intuitively oriented
to it, as when he deals with an object personally strange to him; he knows it
as this deﬁnite person or thing. He knows Hans as Hans, Berlin as Berlin.
To recognize a person as this person, or a city as this city, is again an act not
tied to the particular sensuous content of this or that word-appearance. It is
identically the same act in the case of a variety (in possibility of an inﬁnite
variety) of verbal noises, as, e.g., when several different proper names apply
to the same thing.
This generality of the proper name, and of the peculiar meaning which
corresponds to it, is plainly quite different in kind from that of the general
name.
The former consists in the fact that a synthesis of possible intuitions belongs
to a single individual object, intuitions made one by the common intentional
character imparted by every relation to the same object, despite all phenomenal differences among individual intuitions. On this uniﬁed basis, the
particular unity of recognitive knowing reposes, which belongs to the ‘generality of verbal meaning’, to its range of ideally possible realizations. In this
way the naming word has a recognitive relation to a boundless multitude of
intuitions, whose identical object it both knows and thereby names.
The case of the class-name is quite different. Its generality covers a range
of objects, to each of which, considered apart, a possible synthesis of percepts, a possible individual meaning and proper name belongs. The general

296 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

name ‘covers’ this range through being able to name each item in the whole
range in general fashion, i.e. not by individually recognizing it in the manner
of the proper name, but by classifying it, in the manner of the common name.
The thing that is either directly given, or known in its authentic self-being
(Eigenheit), or known through its properties, is now known as an A and
named accordingly.

§8 The dynamic unity of expression and expressed
intuition. The consciousness of fulfilment and that
of identity
From the tranquil, as it were static coincidence of meaning and intuition, we
now turn to that dynamic coincidence where an expression ﬁrst functions in
merely symbolic fashion, and then is accompanied by a ‘more or less’ corresponding intuition. Where this happens, we experience a descriptively peculiar
consciousness of fulﬁlment:4 the act of pure meaning, like a goal-seeking
intention, ﬁnds its fulﬁlment in the act which renders the matter intuitive.
In this transitional experience, the mutual belongingness of the two acts, the
act of meaning, on the one hand, and the intuition which more or less corresponds to it, on the other, reveals its phenomenological roots. We experience how the same objective item which was ‘merely thought of ’ in symbol
is now presented in intuition, and that it is intuited as being precisely the
determinate so-and-so that it was at ﬁrst merely thought or meant to be. We
are merely expressing the same fact if we say that the intentional essence of
the act of intuition gets more or less perfectly ﬁtted into the semantic essence
of the act of expression.
In the previously considered static relation among acts of meaning and
intuition, we spoke of a recognition, a knowing. This represents the senseinformed relation of the name to the intuitive datum that it names. But the
element of meaning is not here itself the act of recognition. In the purely
symbolic understanding of a word, an act of meaning is performed (the
word means something to us) but nothing is thereby known, recognized.
The difference lies, as the foregoing paragraphs have established, not in the
mere accompanying presence of the intuition of the thing named, but in
the phenomenologically peculiar form of unity. What is characteristic about
this unity of knowing, of recognition, is now shown up by the dynamic
relationship before us. In it there is at ﬁrst the meaning-intention, quite on
its own: then the corresponding intuition comes to join it. At the same time
we have the phenomenological unity which is now stamped as a consciousness of fulﬁlment. Talk about recognizing objects, and talk about fulﬁlling a
meaning-intention, therefore express the same fact, merely from differing
standpoints. The former adopts the standpoint of the object meant, while
the latter has the two acts as its foci of interest. Phenomenologically the acts
are always present, while the objects are sometimes non-existent. Talk of

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 297

fulﬁlment therefore characterizes the phenomenological essence of the recognitive relation more satisfactorily. It is a primitive phenomenological fact,
that acts of signiﬁcation5 and acts of intuition can enter into this peculiar
relation. Where they do so, where some act of meaning-intention fulﬁls itself
in an intuition, we also say: ‘The object of intuition is known through its
concept’ or ‘The correct name has been applied to the object appearing
before us’.
We can readily do justice to the obvious phenomenological difference
between the static and the dynamic fulﬁlment or recognition. In the dynamic
relationship the members of the relation, and the act of recognition which
relates them, are disjoined in time: they unfold themselves in a temporal
pattern. In the static relationship, which represents the lasting outcome of
this temporal transaction, they occur in temporal and material (sachlicher)
coincidence. There we have a ﬁrst stage of mere thought (of pure conception
or mere signiﬁcation), a meaning-intention wholly unsatisﬁed, to which a
second stage of more or less adequate fulﬁlment is added, where thoughts
repose as if satisﬁed in the sight of their object, which presents itself, in
virtue of this consciousness of unity, as what is thought of in this thought,
what it refers to, as the more or less perfectly attained goal of thinking.
In the static relationship, on the other hand, we have this consciousness
of unity alone, perhaps with no noticeably marked-off, precedent stage of
unfulﬁlled intention. The fulﬁlment of the intention is not here an event of
self-fulﬁlment, but a tranquil state of being-fulﬁlled, not a coming into coincidence, but a being coincident.
From an objective point of view we may here also speak of a unity of
identity. If we compare both components of a unity of fulﬁlment – whether
treating them in dynamic transition into one another, or holding them
apart analytically in their static unity, only to see them at once ﬂowing back
into one another – we assert their objective identity. For we said, and said
with self-evidence, that the object of intuition is the same as the object of
the thought which fulﬁls itself in it and, where the ﬁt is exact, that the object
is seen as being exactly the same as it is thought of or (what always says
the same in this context) meant. Identity, it is plain, is not ﬁrst dragged in
through comparative, cogitatively mediated reﬂection: it is there from the
start as experience, as unexpressed, unconceptualized experience. In other
words, the thing which, from the point of view of our acts is phenomenologically described as fulﬁlment, will also, from the point of view of the
two objects involved in it, the intuited object, on the one hand, and the
thought object, on the other, be expressively styled ‘experience of identity’,
‘consciousness of identity’, or ‘act of identiﬁcation’. A more or less complete identity is the objective datum which corresponds to the act of fulﬁlment, which ‘appears in it’. This means that, not only signiﬁcation and
intuition, but also their mutual adequation, their union of fulﬁlment, can be
called an act, since it has its own peculiar intentional correlate, an objective

298 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

something to which it is ‘directed’. Another side of the same situation is
again, we saw above, expressed in talk about recognizing or knowing. The
fact that our meaning-intention is united with intuition in a fulﬁlling manner, gives to the object which appears in such intuition, when it primarily
concerns us, the character of a thing known. If we try to say more exactly
‘as what’ we recognize something, our objective reﬂection points, not to
our act of meaning (Bedeutens), but to the meaning (Bedeutung), the selfidentical ‘concept’ itself; talk of recognition therefore expresses our view of
the same uniﬁed state from the standpoint of the object of intuition (or of
the fulﬁlling act), in its relations to the meaning-concept of the signitive act.
Conversely we say, though perhaps in more special contexts, that our thought
‘grasps’ (begreife) the matter, that it is the latter’s concept (Begriff ) or
‘grasp’. After our exposition it is obvious that recognition, like fulﬁlment –
the former is in fact only another name for the latter – can be called an act
of identiﬁcation.
Addendum. I cannot here suppress a difﬁculty connected with the otherwise
illuminating notion of the unity of identity or recognition, as an act of
identiﬁcation or recognition. This is particularly the case, since this difﬁculty will reveal itself as a serious one as our clariﬁcations proceed and
progress, and will inspire fruitful discussions. Closer analysis makes it plain
that, in the cases detailed above, where a name is actually applied to an
object of intuition, we refer to the intuited and named object, but not to the
identity of this object, as something at once intuited and named. Shall we
say that an emphasis of attention decides the matter? Or ought we not
rather to grant that there is not here a fully constituted act of identiﬁcation:
the nucleus of this act, the connective union of signiﬁcant intention and
corresponding intuition is really present, but it ‘represents’ no objectifying
interpretation (Auffassung). On the experienced unity of coincidence no
act of relational identiﬁcation is founded, no intentional consciousness of
identity, in which identity, as a unity referred to, ﬁrst gains objective status.
In our reﬂection on the unity of fulﬁlment, in analysing and opposing its
mutually connected acts, we naturally, and indeed necessarily, also framed
that relational interpretation which the form of its union, with a priori
necessity, permits. Our second section will deal with this question in its
widest form which concerns the categorial characters of acts (see Chapter ,
§48, and the whole of Chapter ). Meanwhile we shall continue to treat the
sort of unity in question as a full act, or we shall at least not differentiate it
expressly from a full act. This will not affect the essential point in our
treatment, in so far as the passage from a consciousness of unity to a relational identiﬁcation always remains open, has a possibility guaranteed a
priori, so that we are entitled to say that an identifying coincidence has been
experienced, even if there is no conscious intention directed to identity, and
no relational identiﬁcation.

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 299

§10 The wider class of experiences of fulfilment.
Intuitions as intentions which require fulfilment
We may now further characterize the consciousness of fulﬁlment by seeing
in it an experiential form which plays a part in many other ﬁelds of mental
life. We have only to think of the opposition between wishful intention
and wish-fulﬁlment, between voluntary intention and execution, of the fulﬁlment of hopes and fears, the resolution of doubts, the conﬁrmation of
surmises etc., to be clear that essentially the same opposition is to be found
in very different classes of intentional experiences: the opposition between
signiﬁcant intention and fulﬁlment of meaning is merely a special case of
it. We have dealt with this point previously,6 and delimited a class of intentional experience under the more pregnant name of ‘intentions’: their
peculiarity lies in being able to provide the basis for relations of fulﬁlment.
In this class are ranged all the acts which are in a narrower or wider sense
‘logical’, including the intuitive, whose role it is to fulﬁl other intuitions in
knowledge.
When, e.g., a familiar melody begins, it stirs up deﬁnite intentions which
ﬁnd their fulﬁlment in the melody’s gradual unfolding. The same is the case
even when the melody is unfamiliar. The regularities governing melody
as such, determine intentions, which may be lacking in complete objective
deﬁniteness, but which nonetheless ﬁnd or can ﬁnd their fulﬁlments. As
concrete experiences, these intentions are of course fully deﬁnite: the ‘indeﬁniteness’ of what they intend is plainly a descriptive peculiarity pertaining to
their character. We may say, in fact, with correct paradox (as we did before
in a similar case) that ‘indeﬁniteness’ (i.e. the peculiarity of demanding an
incompletely determined completion, which lies in a ‘sphere’ circumscribed
by a law) is a deﬁnite feature of such an intention. Such an intention has not
merely a range of possible fulﬁlment, but imports a common fulﬁlmentcharacter into each actual fulﬁlment from this range. The fulﬁlment of acts
which have deﬁnite or indeﬁnite intentions is phenomenologically different,
and the same holds of fulﬁlments of intentions whose indeﬁniteness points
in this or that direction of possible fulﬁlment.
In our previous example there is also a relation between expectation
and fulﬁlment of expectation. It would, however, be quite wrong to think,
conversely, that every relation of an intention to its fulﬁlment was a relationship involving expectation. Intention is not expectancy, it is not of its
essence to be directed to future appearances. If I see an incomplete pattern,
e.g. in this carpet partially covered over by furniture, the piece I see seems
clothed with intentions pointing to further completions – we feel as if the
lines and coloured shapes go on ‘in the sense’ of what we see – but we expect
nothing. It would be possible for us to expect something, if movement promised us further views. But possible expectations, or occasions for possible
expectations, are not themselves expectations.

300 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

The external perceptions of the senses offer us an indeﬁnite number of
relevant examples. The features which enter into perception always point to
completing features, which themselves might appear in other possible percepts, and that deﬁnitely or more or less indeﬁnitely, according to the degree
of our ‘empirical acquaintance’ with the object. Every percept, and every
perceptual context, reveals itself, on closer analysis, as made up of components which are to be understood as ranged under two standpoints of intention
and (actual or possible) fulﬁlment. The same applies to the parallel acts of
imagining and picture-thought in general. In the normal case intentions lack
the character of expectancy, they lack it in all cases of tranquil perceiving or
picturing, and they acquire it only when perception is in ﬂux, when it is
spread out into a continuous series of percepts, all belonging to the perceptual manifold of one and the same object. Objectively put: the object then
shows itself from a variety of sides. What was pictorially suggested from one
side, becomes conﬁrmed in full perception from another; what was merely
adumbrated or given indirectly and subsidiarily as background, from one
side, at least receives a portrait-sketch from another, it appears perspectivally
foreshortened and projected, only to appear ‘just as it is’ from another side.
All perceiving and imagining is, on our view, a web of partial intentions,
fused together in the unity of a single total intention. The correlate of this
last intention is the thing, while the correlate of its partial intentions are the
thing’s parts and moments. Only in this way can we understand how consciousness reaches out beyond what it actually experiences. It can so to say
mean beyond itself, and its meaning can be fulﬁlled.

§11 Frustration and conflict. The synthesis of
distinction
In the wider sphere of the acts to which distinctions of intention and fulﬁlment apply, frustration may be set beside fulﬁlment, as its incompatible
contrary. The negative expression that we normally use in this case, e.g.
even the term ‘non-fulﬁlment’, has no merely privative meaning: it points to
a new descriptive fact, a form of synthesis as peculiar as fulﬁlment. This is
so even in the narrower case of signiﬁcant intentions as they stand to intuitive
intentions. The synthesis of recognition, of ‘knowing’, is the consciousness
of a certain agreement. The possibility correlated with agreement is, however, ‘disagreement’ or ‘conﬂict’: intuition may not accord with a signiﬁcant
intention, but may ‘quarrel’ with it. Conﬂict ‘separates’, but the experience
of conﬂict puts things into relation and unity: it is a form of synthesis. If the
previously studied synthesis was one of identiﬁcation, this new synthesis is
one of distinction (unfortunately we possess no other positive name). This
‘distinction’ must not be confused with the other ‘distinction’ which stands
opposed to a positive likening. The oppositions between ‘identiﬁcation and
distinction’ and between ‘likening and distinction’ are not the same, though

Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment 301

it is clear that a close phenomenological afﬁnity explains our use of the same
word. In the ‘distinction’ which is here in question, the object of the frustrating act appears not the same as, ‘distinct from the object of the intending act.
These distinctions point to wider classes of cases than we have hitherto
preferred to deal with. Not only signiﬁcative, but even intuitive intentions
are fulﬁlled in identiﬁcations and frustrated in conﬂicts. We shall have to
explore the whole question of the natural circumscription of the acts to
which the terms ‘same’ and ‘other’ (we can as well say ‘is’ and ‘is not’) have
application.
The two syntheses are not, however, completely parallel. Each conﬂict
presupposes something which directs its intention to the object of the conﬂicting act; only a synthesis of fulﬁlment can give it this direction. Conﬂict,
we may say, presupposes a certain basis of agreement. If I think A to be red,
when it shows itself to be ‘in fact’ green, an intention to red quarrels with an
intention to green in this showing forth, i.e. in this application to intuition.
Undeniably, however, this can only be the case because A has been identiﬁed in the two acts of signiﬁcation and intuition. Were this not so, the
intention would not relate to the intuition. The total intention points to an
A which is red, and intuition reveals an A which is green. It is in the coincidence of meaning and intuition in their direction to an identical A, that
the moments intended in union with A in the two cases, come into conﬂict.
The presumed red (i.e. red of A) fails to agree with the intuited green. It is
through identity that such non-coincident aspects correspond with each other:
instead of being ‘combined’ by fulﬁlment, they are ‘sundered’ by conﬂict.
An intention is referred to an appropriate aspect in intuition from which it
is also turned away.
What we have here said with special regard to signiﬁcant intentions and
the frustrations they encounter, applies also to our whole previously sketched
class of objectifying intentions. We may generally say: An intention can only
be frustrated in conﬂict in so far as it forms part of a wider intention whose
completing part is fulﬁlled. We can therefore not talk of conﬂict in the case
of simple, i.e. isolated, acts.

302 Elements
Chapter
2 of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

Indirect characterization of
objectifying intentions and
their essential varieties through
differences in the syntheses of
fulfilment

§13 The synthesis of knowing (recognition) as the
characteristic form of fulfilment for objectifying acts.
Subsumption of acts of meaning under the class of
objectifying acts
We have, in the above treatment, classed meaning-intentions in the wider
class of ‘intentions’ in the pregnant sense of the word. All intentions have
corresponding possibilities of fulﬁlment (or of opposed frustration): these
themselves are peculiar transitional experiences, characterizable as acts, which
permit each act to ‘reach its goal’ in an act specially correlated with it. These
latter acts, inasmuch as they fulﬁl intentions, may be called ‘fulﬁlling acts’,
but they are called so only on account of the synthetic act of fulﬁlment, or
rather of self-fulﬁlment. Such transitional experience is not always the same in
character. In the case of meaning-intentions, and not less clearly in the case
of intuitive intentions, such experiences are unities of knowing, or unities of
identiﬁcation in respect of their objects. This need not be so in the wider
class of intentions in general. Everywhere we may speak of coincidences, and
everywhere we shall meet with identiﬁcations. But the latter often depend on
an inwrought act of a sort which permits of a unity of identiﬁcation and
also serves as the foundation of one in the contexts in question.
An example will clarify the matter. The self-fulﬁlment of a wish is achieved
in an act which includes an identiﬁcation, and includes it as a necessary
component. For there is a law which ties the quality of wishing to an underlying presentation, i.e. to an objectifying act, and more precisely to a ‘mere
presentation’, and this leads to a complementary law tying a wish-fulﬁlment
to an underlying act, which incorporates this presentation in its identifying
grasp. A wishful intention can only ﬁnd its fulﬁlling satisfaction in so far as
the underlying mere presentation of the thing wished for becomes transformed into the corresponding percept. What we have, however, is not this
mere transformation, the mere fact of imagination dissolved in perception:
both enter in unity into the character of an act of identifying coincidence. In
this synthetic character, we have it constituted that a thing is really and truly

Indirect characterization of objectifying intentions and essential varieties 303

so (i.e. as we had previously merely pictured and wished): this of course does
not exclude the possibility that such ‘really being so’ is merely putative, and
especially, in most cases, that it is inadequately presented. If a wish is based
on a purely signitive presentation, this identiﬁcation can of course involve
the more special coincidence described above, in which meaning is fulﬁlled
by an intuition that ﬁts it. The same could plainly be said of all intentions
that, as objectifying acts, are based on presentations, and what applies to
fulﬁlment carries over, mutatis mutandis, to the case of frustration.
It is clear accordingly, to stick to our example, that even if the fulﬁlment
of a wish is founded on an identiﬁcation, and perhaps on an act of intuitive
recognition, this latter act never exhausts the fulﬁlment of the wish, but
merely provides its basis. The self-satisfaction of the speciﬁc wish-quality is
a peculiar, act-character, different in kind. It is by a mere analogy that we
extend talk of satisfaction, and even of fulﬁlment, beyond the sphere of
emotional intentionality.
The peculiar character of an intention accordingly goes with the peculiar
character of its fulﬁlling coincidence. Not only does every nuance of an
intention correspond to some nuance of the correlated fulﬁlment, and likewise of
the self-fulﬁlling activity in the sense of a synthetic act, but to the essentially
different classes of intention there also correspond pervasive class-differences
in fulﬁlment (in the twofold sense mentioned above). And obviously the
members which belong to these parallel series belong also to a single class of
acts. The syntheses of fulﬁlment in the case of wish- and will-intentions
certainly show close afﬁnities, and differ deeply from those occurring, e.g.,
in the case of meaning-intentions. On the other hand, the fulﬁlments of
meaning-intentions and of intuitive acts are deﬁnitely of the same character,
and so in the case of all acts that we classed as ‘objectifying’. We may say of
this class of acts which alone concerns us here, that in them unity of fulﬁlment has the character of unity of identiﬁcation, possibly the narrower character of a unity of knowing, i.e. of an act to which objective identity is the
corresponding correlate.
We must here emphasize the following point: As pointed out above, every
fulﬁlment of a ‘signitive’ by an intuitive act has the character of a synthesis
of identiﬁcation. But it is not the case, conversely, that, in each synthesis of
identiﬁcation, a meaning-intention is fulﬁlled, and fulﬁlled by a corresponding intuition. In the widest sense, certainly, we do ordinarily speak of every
actual identiﬁcation as a recognition. But, in a narrower sense, what is
clearly felt to be at issue is an approach to a goal of knowledge and, in the
narrowest sense of a critique of knowledge, the arrival at that goal. To turn
this mere feeling into clear insight, and to deﬁne the precise sense of this
approach or arrival, will yet be our task. Meanwhile we shall maintain that
the unity of identiﬁcation, and thereby all unity of knowing in the narrower
and the narrowest sense, has its place of origin in the sphere of objectifying
acts.

304 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

Their peculiar manner of fulﬁlment will therefore sufﬁce to characterize
the uniﬁed class of acts to which it essentially belongs. We can accordingly
deﬁne objectifying acts as those whose syntheses of fulﬁlment have a character of identiﬁcation, while their synthesis of frustration has a character of
distinction. We can also deﬁne them as acts which can function phenomenologically as members of possible syntheses of identiﬁcation and distinction.
Lastly, presuming a law as yet unformulated, we can deﬁne them as the
intending, fulﬁlling or frustrating acts which have a possible knowledgefunction. To this class belong also the synthetic acts of identiﬁcation and
distinction themselves: they are themselves either a merely putative grasp of
identity or non-identity, or a corresponding real grasp of the one or the
other. This putative grasp can be either ‘conﬁrmed’ or ‘refuted’ in an act of
knowing (in the pregnant sense of the word): identity is really grasped, i.e.
‘adequately perceived’, in the former case, as non-identity in the latter.
Our analyses have been lightly sketched rather than thoroughly executed,
but they lead to the result that both meaning-intentions and acts of meaningfulﬁlment, acts of ‘thought’ and acts of intuition, belong to a single class of
objectifying acts. We establish thereby that acts of another sort can never
exercise any sense-giving function, and that they can be ‘expressed’ only in so
far as the meaning-intentions which attach to words are fulﬁlled in percepts
or imaginations which have as objects the acts requiring expression. While,
therefore, where acts function meaningfully, and achieve expression in this
sense, a ‘signitive’ or intuitive relation to objects is constituted in them, in
the other cases the acts are mere objects, and objects, of course, for other
acts which here function as the authentic carriers of meaning.
Before we discuss this matter more closely, and seek to refute many plausible counter-arguments – see the ﬁnal Section of this Investigation – we
must explore the remarkable facts of fulﬁlment somewhat more carefully,
and in the sphere of objectifying acts.

§14 Phenomenological characterization of the
distinction between signitive and intuitive intentions
through peculiarities of fulfilment
(a) Sign, image and self-presentation
In the course of the last discussion we have been led to note how the generic
character of an intention closely coheres with that of its synthesis of fulﬁlment, so that the whole class of objectifying acts can be deﬁned through
the identiﬁcation generically characteristic of their syntheses of fulﬁlment,
whose nature we take to be familiar. This thought leads us on to ask
whether the speciﬁc differences within this class of objectiﬁcations, may not
likewise rest upon corresponding differences in the mode of fulﬁlment.
Objectifying intentions are basically divided into signiﬁcative and intuitive

Indirect characterization of objectifying intentions and essential varieties 305

intentions: let us try to give an account of the difference between these types
of act.
Since the starting point of our treatment lay in expressed acts, we took
signitive intentions to be the signiﬁcations, the meanings of expressions. If
we leave aside the question whether the same acts which give sense to expressions can also function outside of the sphere of meaning, these signitive
intentions always have intuitive support in the sensuous side of the expression, but not on that account intuitive content. Though in a manner one
with intuitive acts, they yet differ from them in kind.
We can readily grasp the distinction between expressed and purely intuitive intentions if we contrast signs with likenesses or images.
The sign has in general no community of content with the thing it signiﬁes; it can stand as readily for what is heterogeneous, as for what is homogeneous with itself. The likeness on the other hand is related to the thing by
similarity: where there is no similarity, there can be no talk of a likeness,
an image. The sign as object is constituted for us in an act of appearing.
This act is not signiﬁcant: it needs, as we held in former analyses, to be tied
up with a new intention, a new way of taking things, through which a novel,
signiﬁed object takes the place of the old, intuitively apparent one. The
likeness similarly, e.g. the marble bust, is as much a thing as anything else:
the new way of regarding it ﬁrst makes it a likeness. Not merely a thing of
marble appears before us, but we have, based on this appearance, a reference to a person through a likeness.
The intentions attaching to the phenomenal content are, in either case,
not externally tied up with it, but essentially based upon it, and in such a
way that the character of the intention is determined thereby. It would be a
descriptively wrong notion of the matter, to think of the whole difference as
lying in the fact that the same intention which, in the one case is tied to the
appearance of an object like the object referred to, is in the other case tied to
the appearance of an object unlike it. For the sign, too, can be like what it
signiﬁes, even entirely like it: the sign-presentation is not thereby made into
a presentation by way of a likeness. A photograph of the sign A is immediately taken to be a picture of the sign. But when we use the sign A as a sign
of the sign A, as when we write ‘A is a letter of the Latin written alphabet’, we
treat A, despite its representational similarity, as a sign, and not as a likeness.
The objective fact of similarity between what appears and what is meant,
is accordingly irrelevant: it is not, however, irrelevant where something is
presented by way of a likeness. This shows itself in the possibility of fulﬁlment: it was only the recollection of this possibility which allowed us to
bring in ‘objective’ similarity in this context. The likeness-presentation plainly
has the peculiarity that, when it achieves fulﬁlment, the object which appears before it as likeness gets identiﬁed through similarity with the object
given in the fulﬁlling act. Having held this to be the peculiarity of a presentation by way of likeness, we have admitted that fulﬁlment of like by like

306 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

internally ﬁxes the character of a synthesis of fulﬁlment as imaginative. But,
when, on the other hand, casual likeness between sign and thing signiﬁed
leads to a knowledge of their mutual resemblance, this knowledge is not at
all a case of the peculiar consciousness of identity, when similar is referred to
similar and made to coincide with it in the manner of likeness and original
thing. It is rather of the very essence of a signiﬁcative intention, that in it
the apparent objects of intending and fulﬁlling acts (e.g. name and thing
named in their fully achieved unity) ‘have nothing to do with one another’.
It is clear, therefore, that descriptively distinct modes of fulﬁlment, being
rooted in the descriptively distinct character of our intention, can help us to
detect these latter differences, and to ﬁnd deﬁnitions for them.
We have so far only considered the difference between signitive and imaginative intentions. If we ignore less weighty distinctions within the wider
sphere of imaginative acts – we have preferred to consider representation by
way of physical images, instead of stressing those of fantasy – we must still
consider the case of percepts.
As opposed to imagination, perception is characterized by the fact that in
it, as we are wont to express the matter, the object ‘itself ’ appears, and does
not merely appear ‘in a likeness’. In this we at once recognize characteristic
differences in syntheses of fulﬁlment. Imagination fulﬁls itself through the
peculiar synthesis of image-resemblance, perception through the synthesis of
identical thinghood (sachlichen Identität). The thing establishes itself through
its very self, in so far as it shows itself from varying sides while remaining
one and the same.
(b) The perceptual and imaginative adumbration of
the object
We must, however, pay heed to the following distinction. Perception, so far
as it claims to give us the object ‘itself ’, really claims thereby to be no mere
intention, but an act, which may indeed be capable of offering fulﬁlment to
other acts, but which itself requires no further fulﬁlment. But generally, and
in all cases of ‘external’ perception, this remains a mere pretension. The
object is not actually given, it is not given wholly and entirely as that which
it itself is. It is only given ‘from the front’, only ‘perspectivally foreshortened
and projected’ etc. While many of its properties are illustrated in the nuclear
content of the percept, at least in the (perspectival) manner which the last
expressions indicate, many others are not present in the percept in such
illustrated form: the elements of the invisible rear side, the interior etc., are
no doubt subsidiarily intended in more or less deﬁnite fashion, symbolically
suggested by what is primarily apparent, but are not themselves part of
the intuitive, i.e. of the perceptual or imaginative content, of the percept.
On this hinges the possibility of indeﬁnitely many percepts of the same
object, all differing in content. If percepts were always the actual, genuine

Indirect characterization of objectifying intentions and essential varieties 307

self-presentations of objects that they pretend to be, there could be only a
single percept for each object, since its peculiar essence would be exhausted
in such self-presentation.
We must, however, note that the object, as it is in itself – in the only sense
relevant and understandable in our context, the sense which the fulﬁlment
of the perceptual intention would carry out – is not wholly different from the
object realized, however imperfectly, in the percept. It is part so-to-say of a
percept’s inherent sense to be the self-appearance of the object. Even if, for
phenomenological purposes, ordinary perception is composed of countless
intentions, some purely perceptual, some merely imaginative, and some even
signitive, it yet, as a total act, grasps the object itself, even if only by way of
an adumbration. If we may conceive of a percept put into a relation of
fulﬁlment to the adequate percept that would offer us the object itself, in the
ideally strict and most authentic sense, then we may say that a percept so
intends its object that this ideal synthesis would have the character of a
partial coincidence of the purely perceptual contents of intending and fulﬁlling acts, and also the character of a complete coincidence of both complete
perceptual intentions. The ‘purely perceptual’ content in ‘external’ perception is what remains over when we abstract from all purely imaginative and
symbolic components: it is the ‘sensed’ content to which its own, immediate,
purely perceptual interpretation is given, which evaluates all its parts and
moments as self-projections of corresponding parts and moments of the
perceptual object, and so imparts to its total content the character of a
‘perceptual picture’, a perceptual adumbration of the object. In the ideal,
limiting case of adequate perception, this self-presenting sensed content
coincides with the perceived object. This common relation to the object ‘in
itself ’, i.e. to the ideal of adequation, enters into the sense of all perception,
and is also manifest in the phenomenological mutual belongingness of the
manifold percepts pertaining to a single object. In one percept the object
appears from this side, in another from that side; now it appears close, now
at a distance etc. In each percept, despite these differences, one and the same
object is ‘there’, in each it is intended in the complete range of its familiar
and of its perceptually present properties. To this corresponds phenomenologically a continuous ﬂux of fulﬁlment or identiﬁcation, in the steady
serialization of the percepts ‘pertaining to the same object’. Each individual
percept is a mixture of fulﬁlled and unfulﬁlled intentions. To the former
corresponds that part of the object which is given in more or less perfect
projection in this individual percept, to the latter that part of the object that
is not yet given, that new percepts would bring to actual, fulﬁlling presence.
All such syntheses of fulﬁlment are marked by a common character: they are
identiﬁcations binding self-manifestations of an object to self-manifestations
of the same object.
It is at once clear that similar distinctions apply in the case of imaginative
presentation. Here too the same object is pictured, now from this and now

308 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

from that side. Corresponding to the synthesis of manifold perceptions,
where the same object always presents itself, we have the parallel synthesis
of manifold imaginations, in which the same object appears in a likeness. To
the changing perceptual adumbrations of the object there are corresponding
imaginative adumbrations, and in the ideal of perfect copying the projection
would coincide with the complete likeness. If imaginative acts are at one
time fulﬁlled in imaginative contexts, and at another time through corresponding percepts, the difference lies plainly in the character of their synthesis
of fulﬁlment: the passage from likeness to likeness has a different character
from the passage from likeness to original thing.
The above analysis will be of use for the further investigations to be carried
on in the next chapter; they also show the mutual afﬁnity of percepts and
imaginations, and their common opposition to ‘signitive’ intentions. In all
cases we distinguish between an actually given, appearing content, which is
not what we mean, and an object which is what we mean – whether we signify,
represent or perceive it – or between a sign-content on the one hand, and the
imaginative or perceptual projection of the object on the other. But while sign
and thing signiﬁed ‘have nothing to do with one another’, there are inner
afﬁnities between a thing’s imaginative and perceptual projections and the
thing itself, afﬁnities which are part of the very sense of our use of such words.
These relationships are phenomenologically documented in differences in
their constitutive intentions, and not less in their syntheses of fulﬁlment.
This account does not, of course, affect our interpretation of every fulﬁlment as being an identiﬁcation. In all cases an intention comes into coincidence with the act which offers it fulness, i.e. the object which is meant in it
is the same as the object meant in the fulﬁlling act. We were not, however,
comparing these objects of meaning-reference, but signs and adumbrations
in their relations to such objects, or to what corresponds phenomenologically
to these relationships.
Our interest in the preceding paragraphs was primarily directed to peculiarities in syntheses of fulﬁlment: these enable us to differentiate intuitive
and signitive acts in a merely indirect manner. Only in the further course of
our investigation – in §26 – shall we be able to give a direct characterization,
based on an analysis of the intentions, and without regard to their possible
fulﬁlments.

§15 Signitive intentions beyond the limits of the
meaning-function
In our last discussion we have pinned down certain components of intuitive acts as signitive intentions. But in the whole of our investigations up to
this point, signitive acts were for us acts of meaning, sense-giving factors
attached to expressions. The terms ‘signiﬁcation’ and ‘signitive intention’ were
for us synonymous. It is now time to ask ourselves whether the same acts, or

Indirect characterization of objectifying intentions and essential varieties 309

acts essentially similar to those found to function in meaning, may not
occur quite divorced from this function and from all expressions.
That this question must be answered afﬁrmatively, is shown by certain
cases of wordless recognition, which exhibit the precise character of verbal
recognition, although words, in their sensuous-signitive content, are not
actually present at all. We recognize an object, e.g. as an ancient Roman
milestone, its scratchings as weather-worn inscriptions, although no words
are aroused at once, or indeed at all. We recognize a tool as a drill, but
its name will not come back to us etc. Genetically expressed, present intuitions stir up an associative disposition directed to the signiﬁcant expression.
But the meaning-component of this last alone is actualized, and this now
radiates backwards into the intuition which aroused it, and overﬂows into
the latter with the character of a fulﬁlled intention. These cases of wordless
recognition are none other than fulﬁlments of meaning-intentions, but
phenomenologically divorced from the signitive contents which otherwise
pertain to them. Comparable examples are furnished by reﬂection on the
normal interweavings of scientiﬁc pondering. We observe here how trains
of thought sweep on to a large extent without bondage to appropriate
words, set off by a ﬂood of intuitive imagery or by their own associative
interconnections.
With this is connected the further fact that expressive speech goes so far
beyond the intuitive data necessary for the actual appropriateness of the
expression of acquaintance. This has, no doubt, an opposed ground in the
extraordinary ease with which verbal images are revived by intuitions, and
can themselves then revive symbolic thoughts without corresponding
intuitions. But we must also observe, contrariwise, how the reproduction of
imaged words often lags quite far behind the trains of thought revived by
each present intuition. In both these ways a large number of inadequate
expressions arise, which do not apply in a straightforward manner to the
primary intuitions actually present, nor to the synthetic formations actually
built upon them, but range far beyond what is thus given. Curious mixtures
of acts result. Objects are, strictly speaking, only ‘known’, as they are given
in their actual intuitive foundation, but, since the unity of our intention
ranges further, objects appear to be known as what they are for this total
intention. The character of knowing is accordingly somewhat broadened. Thus
we recognize (know) a person as an adjutant of the Kaiser, a handwriting as
Goethe’s, a mathematical expression as the Cardanian formula, and so on.
Here our recognition can of course not apply itself to what is given in perception, at best it permits possible application to intuitive sequences, which
need not themselves be actualized at all. In this manner recognitions, and
sequences of recognitions, are possible on a basis of partial intuitions,
which would on a priori grounds, not at all be possible on a basis of complete actual intuitions, since they combine incompatibles in themselves. There
are, and are only too many, false and even absurd recognitions. But ‘really’

310 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

they are not recognitions, i.e. not logically worthwhile, complete ‘knowings’,
not recognitions in the strong sense. To say this is to anticipate later discussions. For we have not yet clariﬁed the ordering of the levels of knowledge
(a matter here touched upon), nor the ideals which limit these.
So far we had to do with signitive intentions, which exist identically, and
just as they are, both within and without the function of meaning. But
countless signitive intentions lack either a ﬁxed or a passing tie with expressions, though their essential character puts them in a class with meaningintentions. I here recur to the perceptual or imaginative course of a melody,
or of some other familiar type of event, and to the deﬁnite or indeﬁnite
intentions and fulﬁlments which arise in such a course. I refer likewise to
the empirical arrangement and connection of things in their phenomenal
coexistence, in regard to whatever gives the things appearing in this order,
and especially the parts in each uniﬁed individual thing, the character of
a unity involving precisely this order and this form. Representation and recognition through analogy may unite likeness and original (analogon and
analogizatum), and may make them seem to belong together, but they cannot unite what is not merely contiguously given together, but what appears
as belonging together. And even if, in the realization of representations
through contiguity, images anticipating what is signitively represented are
conﬁrmed by their fulﬁlling originals, the unity among such contiguous
representatives and what is represented through them can be given by no
relation of picturing (since such a relation is not operative among them) but
only through the entirely peculiar relation of signitive representation by way
of contiguity.
We may therefore rightly see, in inadequate percepts and imaginations,
interwoven masses of primitive intentions, among which, in addition to
perceptual and imaginative elements, there are also intentions of a signitive
kind. We may therefore maintain, in general, that all phenomenological
differences in objectifying acts reduce to their constituent elementary intentions and fulﬁlments, the former bound to the latter through syntheses
of fulﬁlment. On the side of intentions, the only last differences are those
between signitive intentions, as intentions by way of contiguity, and imaginative intentions, as intentions by way of analogy, each plain and pure in
their own kind. On the side of fulﬁlment, intentions of either sort again
function as components, but on occasion (as in the case of perception) we
have components which cannot be called intentions, since they only fulﬁl
but require no fulﬁlment, self-presentations of the object meant by them in
the strictest sense of the word. The character of the elementary acts then
determines the characters of the syntheses of fulﬁlment, which in their turn
determine the homogeneous unity of the complex act. The emphatic power
of attention helps to transfer the character of this or that elementary act
to the unity of the act as a whole: this whole act becomes imagination or
signiﬁcation or pure perception. And where two such uniﬁed acts enter into

Indirect characterization of objectifying intentions and essential varieties 311

relation, relationships of agreement and conﬂict arise, whose character is
determined by the total acts underlying such relations, and ultimately by
their elements.
In the next chapter these relationships will be further tracked down, within
the limits in which they can be phenomenologically ascertained and epistemologically evaluated. We shall keep strictly to phenomenologically given
unities, and to the sense inherent in these and declared in their fulﬁlment.
We shall thus avoid the temptation to embark on hypothetical construction,
with whose doubts a clariﬁcation of knowledge should in no way be burdened.

312 Elements
Chapter
3 of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

The phenomenology of the levels
of knowledge

§16 Simple identification and fulfilment
In describing the relation of signiﬁcant intention to fulﬁlling intuition we
began with the verbal expression of a percept, and said that the intentional
essence of the intuitive act ﬁtted in with, or belonged to, the semantic essence
of the signiﬁcative act. This is plainly so in every case of total identiﬁcation,
where acts of like quality, i.e. both assertive or both unassertive, are synthetically uniﬁed; where the acts are of unlike quality, the identiﬁcation is solely
based on their materials. This carries over, mutatis mutandis, to cases of partial identiﬁcation, so that we may hold that the material or matter is the aspect
of the character of each act which comes up for synthesis, that is essential
for identiﬁcation (and naturally also for distinction).
In the case of identiﬁcation, the ‘matters’ are the special carriers of the
synthesis, without themselves being identiﬁed. For talk of identiﬁcation is,
in virtue of its sense, concerned with the objects presented by such ‘matters’.
On the other hand, in the act of identiﬁcation, the matters themselves achieve
coincidence. Every example shows, however, that even where qualities are
alike, the acts need not become quite alike: this is due to the fact that an act
is not exhausted by its intentional essence. What remains over will reveal its
importance in a careful phenomenological investigation of the levels of knowledge, which will be our task. It is clear from the start that, if knowledge
admits of degrees of perfection, even when matter is constant, matter cannot
be responsible for such differences of perfection, and cannot therefore determine the peculiar essence of knowledge as against any identiﬁcation whatever. We shall tie our further investigation to a discussion of the previously
studied difference of mere identiﬁcation and fulﬁlment.
We equated1 fulﬁlment with knowledge (in the narrower sense of the word)
indicating that we were only talking of certain forms of identiﬁcation which
brought us nearer to the goal of knowledge. What this means may be elucidated by saying: In each fulﬁlment there is more or less complete intuitive
illustration (Veranschaulichung). What the intention means, but presents only
in more or less inauthentic and inadequate manner, the fulﬁlment – the act

The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge

313

attaching itself to an intention, and offering it ‘fulness’ in the synthesis of
fulﬁlment – sets directly before us, or at least more directly than the intention does. In fulﬁlment our experience is represented by the words: ‘This is
the thing itself ’. This ‘itself ’ must not be understood too strictly, as if there
must be some percept bringing the object itself to actual phenomenal presence. It is possible that, in the progress of knowledge, in the gradual ascent
from acts of poorer, to acts of ever richer epistemic fulness, we must at
length always reach fulﬁlling percepts: this does not mean that each step,
each individual identiﬁcation that we call a fulﬁlment, need contain a percept
as its fulﬁlling act. The relative manner in which we speak of ‘more or less
direct’ and of ‘self ’, indicates the main point: that the synthesis of fulﬁlment
involves an inequality in worth among its related members. The fulﬁlling act
has a superiority which the mere intention lacks: it imparts to the synthesis
the fulness of ‘self ’, at least leads it more directly to the thing itself. The
relativity of this ‘directness’, this ‘self ’, points further to the fact that the
relation of fulﬁlment is of a sort that admits of degrees. A concatenation of
such relations seems accordingly possible where the epistemic superiority
steadily increases. Each such ascending series points, however, to an ideal
limit, or includes it as a ﬁnal member, a limit setting an unsurpassable
goal to all advances: the goal of absolute knowledge, of the adequate selfpresentation of the object of knowledge.
We have thereby achieved, at least in preliminary fashion,2 the characteristic differentiating mark of fulﬁlments within the wider class of identiﬁcations. For not every identiﬁcation represents such an approach to a goal of
knowledge: there can well be a purposeless inﬁnity of ever further identiﬁcations. There are, e.g., indeﬁnitely many arithmetical expressions having the
same numerical value 2, which permit us to add identiﬁcation to identiﬁcation
in inﬁnitum. Just so there may be inﬁnitely many images of one and the same
thing, determining again the possibility of endless chains of identiﬁcations
tending to no goal of knowledge. The same holds for the endlessly many
percepts of one and the same thing.
If we pay heed to the constitutive elementary intentions in these intuitive
examples, we shall of course ﬁnd moments of true fulﬁlment entering into
the total act of identiﬁcation. This happens when we set image-presentations
side by side which are not of completely equal intuitive content, so that the
new image brings out many things much more clearly, and perhaps sets
something before us ‘just as it is’, while a former image merely ‘projects’ it
or denotes it symbolically. If we imaginatively envisage an object turning
itself to every side, our sequence of images is constantly linked by syntheses
of fulﬁlment in respect of its partial intentions, but each new imagepresentation does not, as a whole, fulﬁl its predecessor, nor does the whole
series progressively approach any goal. Just so in the case of the manifold
percepts belonging to the same external thing. Gain and loss are balanced
at every step: a new act has richer fulness in regard to certain properties,

314 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

for whose sake it has lost fulness in regard to others. But against this we
may hold that the whole synthesis of the series of imaginations or percepts
represents an increase in fulness in comparison with an act singled out from
the series: the imperfection of the one-sided representation is, relatively
speaking, overcome in the all-sided one. We say ‘relatively speaking’, since
the all-sided representation is not achieved in such a synthetic manifold
in the single ﬂash which the ideal of adequation requires, as a pure selfpresentation without added analogizing or symbolization: it is achieved
piecemeal and always blurred by such additions. Another example of an
intuitive fulﬁlment-series is the transition from a rough drawing to a more
exact pencil-sketch, then from the latter to the completed picture, and from
this to the living ﬁnish of the painting, all of which present the same, visibly
the same, object.
Such examples from the sphere of mere imagination show that the character of fulﬁlment does not require that assertive quality in the intending
and fulﬁlling acts which is part of the logical concept of knowledge. We
prefer to speak of ‘knowledge’ where an opinion, in the normal sense of a
belief, has been conﬁrmed or attested.

§17 The question of the relation between fulfilment
and intuitive illustration
We must now enquire into the part played in knowledge by the various
kinds of objectifying acts – signitive and intuitive acts – and, under the latter
rubric, acts of perception and imagination. Here intuitive acts plainly seem
to be preferred, so much so, in fact, as to incline one to call all fulﬁlment
intuitive illustration (Veranschaulichung) – as we did above in passing – or to
describe the work of fulﬁlment, wherever one deals with intuitive intentions,
as a mere increase in intuitive fulness. The relation between intention and
fulﬁlment plainly underlies the formation of the conceptual couple: thought
(more narrowly, concept), on the one hand, and corresponding intuition, on
the other. But we must not forget that a notion of intuition oriented
towards this relation does not at all coincide with that of an intuitive act,
although, through the inherent tendency towards intuition which enters into
the sense of all fulﬁlment, it closely depends on the latter and even presupposes it. To make a thought clear to oneself means, primarily, to give
epistemic fulness to the content of one’s thought. This can, however, be
achieved, in a certain fashion, even by a signitive presentation. Of course, if
we ask for a clearness which will make matters self-evident, which will make
‘the thing itself ’ clear, render its possibility and its truth knowable, we are
referred to intuition in the sense of our intuitive acts. For this reason talk of
‘clearness’ in epistemological contexts plainly has this narrower sense, it
indicates recourse to fulﬁlling intuition, to the ‘originative source’ of concepts and propositions in their subject-matters themselves.

The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge

315

Carefully analysed examples are now needed if we are to conﬁrm and
develop what has just been suggested. These will help us to clear up the relation
between fulﬁlment and intuitive illustration, and to render quite precise the
part played by intuition in every fulﬁlment. Differences between authentic
and inauthentic illustration (or fulﬁlment) will distinguish themselves clearly,
and the difference between mere identiﬁcation and fulﬁlment will also
therewith reach ﬁnal clarity. The work of intuition will be shown to be that
of contributing to the intended act, when authentically fulﬁlled, a genuinely
novel element, to which the name ‘fulness’ may be given. We are thereby
made aware of a hitherto unstressed side of the phenomenological content
of acts, which is fundamental for knowledge. ‘Fulness’ must take its place as
a new ‘moment’ in an intuitive act alongside of its quality and its matter, a
moment specially belonging to the matter which it in some manner completes.

§22 Fullness and ‘intuitive substance’ (Gehalt)
Closely regarded, the concept of fulness is still fraught with an ambiguity.
The above mentioned moments can be looked at in respect of their own
existential content, without regard to the functions of pure imagination or
perception, which ﬁrst confer on them the value of being a picture or a
perspectivally slanted self-revelation, and so a value for the function of
fulﬁlment. On the other hand, one can consider these moments in their
interpretation, i.e. not these moments alone, but the full pictures or slanted
self-revelations in question. Ignoring only intentional qualities, one can deal
with purely intuitive acts as wholes, which include these moments in themselves, since they give them an objective signiﬁcance. These ‘purely intuitive’
acts we conceive as mere constituents of the intuitions just mentioned, being
the element in them which gives to the moments previously mentioned, a
relation to corresponding objective properties which are represented through
them. We ignore therewith (in addition to the qualities) the yet further
attached signitive relations to further parts or sides of the object which are
not, properly speaking (intuitively), represented.
It is plainly these purely intuitive constituents which impart to total acts
the character of percepts or imaginings, i.e. their intuitive character, and
which function in the system of serially ordered fulﬁlments as the element
which confers ‘fulness’, or which enriches or increases the same when already present. To deal with this ambiguity in our talk of ‘fulness’ we shall
introduce the following distinguishing terms:
By intuitively presentative or intuitively representative contents (Inhalten)
we understand those contents of intuitive acts which, owing to the purely
imaginative or perceptual interpretations that they sustain, point unambiguously to deﬁnitely corresponding contents in the object, represent these in
imagined or perceived perspectival slantings. The act-aspects which characterize them in this manner, we ignore. Since the character of imagination

316 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

lies in analogical picturing, in ‘representation’ in a narrower sense, while
the character of perception can be called strictly presentative, the following
distinctive names suggest themselves: For the intuitively presentative contents in either case – analogizing or picturing contents, on the one hand, and
strictly presentative or self-presentative contents, on the other. The expressions ‘imaginatively slanted contents’ and ‘perceptively slanted contents’
are also very apt. The intuitively presentative contents of outer perception
deﬁne the concept of sensation in the ordinary, narrow sense. The intuitively
presentative contents of external fantasy are sensory phantasms or images.
The intuitively presentative or intuitively representative contents in and
with the interpretation put upon them, we call the intuitive substance (Gehalt)
of the act: in this we still ignore the quality of the act (whether assertive or
not), as being indifferent to the distinctions in question. On the above, all
signitive components of an act are excluded from its intuitive ‘substance’.3

§23 Relationships of weight between the intuitive and
signitive ‘substance’ (Gehalt) of one and the same act.
Pure intuition and pure signification. Perceptual and
imaginal content, pure perception and pure
imagination. Gradations of fulness
To increase the clearness of the concepts just marked off, and to aid in the
marking off of a new set of concepts, rooted in the same soil, we embark on
the following discussion:
In an intuitive presentation (Vorstellung) an object is meant in the manner
of perception or imagination: in this manner it is more or less perfectly
made apparent. To each part and each property of the object, including its
reference to a here and a now, there must necessarily be a corresponding
part or moment of the conscious act. What we do not mean, is simply not
there for our presentation (Vorstellung). We now ﬁnd in general that it is
possible to draw the following phenomenological distinction between
(1) The purely intuitive ‘substance’ (Gehalt) of the act, i.e. all that corresponds
in the act to the sum total of the object’s properties that ‘become apparent’,
(2) The signitive ‘substance’ of the act, which corresponds to the sum total
of the remaining, subsidiarily given properties of the object, which do not
themselves become apparent.
We all draw such a distinction, in purely phenomenological fashion, in
the intuition involved in the percept or image of a thing, between whatever
in the object is truly made apparent, the mere ‘side’ from which the object
is shown to us, and whatever lacks intuitive presentation (Darstellung), is
hidden by other phenomenal objects etc. Such talk plainly implies, what
phenomenological analysis within certain limits deﬁnitely proves, that even
what is not presented (Nicht-Dargestelltes) in an intuitive presentation
(Vorstellung) is subsidiarily meant, and that an array of signitive components

The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge

317

must accordingly be ascribed to the latter, from which we have to abstract,
if we wish to keep our intuitive content pure. This last gives the intuitively
presenting (darstellende) content its direct relation to corresponding objective moments: other novel and, to that extent, mediate, signitive intentions,
are attached to these by contiguity.
If we now deﬁne the weight of the intuitive (or signitive) content as the
sum total of the intuitively (or signitively) presented (vorgestellte) moments
of the object, both ‘weights’ in each presentation (Vorstellung) will add up
to a single total weight, i.e. the sum total of the object’s properties. Always
therefore the symbolic equation holds: i + s = 1. The weights i and s can
plainly vary in many regards: the same, intentionally same, object can be
intuitively given with more or less numerous, ever varying properties. The
signitive content also alters correspondingly, it is increased or diminished.
Ideally we now have the possibility of two limiting cases:
i=0
i=1

s=1
s = 0.

In the former, the presentation (Vorstellung) would have only signitive
content: no property of its intentional object would remain over which
was brought to intuitive presentation (Darstellung) in its content. The special
case of purely signitive presentations, well-known to us as pure meaningintentions, therefore appears here as a limiting case of intuition.
In the second case the presentation (Vorstellung) has no signitive content
whatever. In it all is fulness: no part, no side, no property of its object fails to
be intuitively presented (dargestellt), none is merely indirectly and subsidiarily
meant. Not only is everything that is intuitively presented also meant – so
much is analytically true – but whatever is meant is also intuitively presented. This new class of presentations may be deﬁned as pure intuitions, the
term here used with innocuous ambiguity, at times to cover complete acts,
at times such acts in abstraction from their quality. We may speak distinguishingly of qualiﬁed and unqualiﬁed pure intuitions.
In each presentation (Vorstellung) we can therefore surely abstract from
all signitive components, and limit ourselves to what is really represented in
its representative content. By so doing we form a reduced presentation, with
a reduced object in regard to which it is purely intuitive. We can accordingly
say that the intuitive substance (Gehalt) of a presentation comprises all that
is pure intuition in it, just as we may also speak of the object’s purely intuitive content, of all that is rendered intuitive in this presentation. The like
applies to the signitive substance of the presentation: this can be said to be
all that is pure signiﬁcation in it.
Each total act of intuition has either the character of a percept or an
imagination: its intuitive substance is then either perceptual or imaginative
substance or content. This must not be confused with the perceptually or
imaginatively presenting content in the sense deﬁned in §22.

318 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

Perceptual content comprises (though not in general exclusively) strictly
presentative contents: imaginative contents comprise only analogizing
contents. It is not to the point that these latter contents permit of another
interpretation (as in the case of physical images), in which they function
strictly presentatively.
On account of the mixture of perceptual and imaginative components
which the intuitive substance of a percept permits and usually exhibits, we can
again consider adopting a division of perceptual content into pure perceptual
content, on the one hand, and supplementary image-content, on the other.
If then, in each pure intuition we take Pp and Ip to be the weights of its
purely perceptual and purely imaginative components, we can write down
the symbolic equation
Pp + Ip = 1
where 1 symbolizes the weight of the total intuitive content of the pure
intuition, and thus the total content of its object. If Ip = 0, i.e. if the pure
intuition is free from all imaginal content, it should be called a pure perception: we shall here ignore the qualitatively assertive character usually
embraced in the sense of the term ‘perception’. But if Pp = 0, the intuition is
called pure imagination. The ‘purity’ of pure perception relates, therefore,
not merely to signitive, but also to imaginative supplements. The narrowing
of an impure percept which throws out symbolic components yields the pure
intuition which is immanent in it: a further reductive step then throws out
everything imagined, and yields the substance of pure perception.
Can the intuitively presentative content in the case of pure perception be
identiﬁed with the object itself ? The essence of pure presentation (in the
strict sense) surely consists in being a pure self-presentation of the object,
one which means the intuitively presentative content directly (in the manner
of ‘self ’) as its object. This would, however, be a paralogism. The percept,
as presentation in the strict sense, so interprets the intuitively presentative
content, that the object appears as itself given with and in this content. Presentation (in the strict sense) is pure, when each part of the object is actually
and intuitively presented in the content, and none is merely imagined or
symbolized. As there is nothing in the object not strictly presented, so there
is nothing in the content not strictly presentative. Despite such exact correspondence, self-presentation may still have the character of the mere, even if
all-sided perspectivity (of a completed perceptual picture): it need not attain
the ideal of adequation, where the intuitively presenting content is also the
intuitively presented content. The pure picture-presentation, which completely depicts its object through its freedom from all signitive additions,
holds in its intuitively presentative content a complete likeness of the object.
This likeness can approach the object more or less closely, to a limit of
complete resemblance. The same may be true in the case of pure perception,

The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge

319

with the sole difference, that imagination treats the content as a likeness or
image, whereas perception looks on it as a self-revelation of the object. Pure
perception no less than pure imagination admits, accordingly, of differing
degrees of fulness, without thereby altering its intentional object. Regarding
the degrees of fulness of intuitive content, to which degrees of fulness of representative content run eo ipso parallel, we may distinguish:
1. The extent or richness of the fulness, according as the content of the
object achieves intuitive presentation with greater or less completeness.
2. The liveliness of this fulness, i.e. the degree of approximation of the
primitive resemblances of the intuitive presentation to the corresponding
moments of content in the object.
3. The reality-level (Realitätsgehalt) of the fulness, the greater or less
number of its strictly presentative contents.
In all these regards, adequate perception represents an ideal: it has a
maximum of extent, liveliness and reality: it is the self-apprehension of the
whole, full object.

§25 Fullness and intentional matter
We now wish to discuss the relation between the new concept of presentational content covered by the name ‘fulness’, with content in the sense
of ‘matter’, which last has played such a large part in our investigation up
to this point. ‘Matter’ was classed as that moment in an objectifying act
which makes the act present just this object in just this manner, i.e. in just
these articulations and forms, and with special relation to just these properties or relationships. Presentations which agree in their matter do not merely
present the same object in some general fashion: they mean it in the most
complete fashion as the same, as having exactly the same properties. The
one presentation confers nothing on the object in its intention which the
other presentation does not likewise confer. To each objectifying articulation and form on one side there is a corresponding articulation and form on
the other, in such a manner that the agreeing elements of the presentations
have an identical objective reference. In this sense we said in our Fifth
Investigation, in elucidating the concepts of ‘matter’ and ‘semantic essence’:
‘Two judgements are in essence the same judgement (i.e. judgements with
the same ‘matter’), if everything that would hold of the state of affairs
judged according to one, would likewise hold of it according to the other,
and nothing different would hold of it in either case. The truth-value of the
judgements is the same’. They mean the same in regard to the object, even if
they are otherwise quite different, if the one, e.g., is achieved signitively,
while the other is more or less illustrated by intuition.
I was led to form this notion through a consideration of what is identical
in the assertive and understanding use of the same expression, where one

320 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

may ‘believe’ the content of some statement, while another leaves it undecided, without disturbing this content’s identity, in which case it also makes
no difference whether expression occurs in connection with correspondent
intuition, and whether it can so occur or not. One might therefore be tempted
– I myself hesitated long on this point – to deﬁne meaning as this very
‘matter’, which would, however, have the inconvenience that the moment of
assertion in, e.g., a predicative statement, would fall outside of that statement’s meaning. (One could no doubt limit the concept of meaning in this
fashion, and then distinguish between qualiﬁed and unqualiﬁed meanings.)
Our comparison of meaning-intentions with their correlative intuitions, in
the static and dynamic unity of identifying coincidence, showed us, however,
that the very thing that we marked off as the ‘matter’ of meaning, reappeared once more in the corresponding intuition, and furnished the means
for an identiﬁcation. Our freedom, therefore, to add to or take away intuitive elements, and even all correspondent intuitions, wherever we limited our
concern to the abiding meaningfulness of a given expression, was based on
the fact that the whole act attaching to the sound of our words had the same
‘matters’ on the intuitive as on the meaning side, in respect, that is, of such
elements of meaning as receive intuitive illustration at all.
It is clear, therefore, that the concept of ‘matter’ must be deﬁned by way
of the unity of total identiﬁcation as the element in our acts which serves as a
basis for identiﬁcation, and that all differences of fulness which go beyond
mere identiﬁcation, and which variously determine peculiarities of fulﬁlment
and increase of fulﬁlment, have no relevance in the formation of this conception. However the fulness of a presentation may vary within its possible
gradients of fulﬁlment, its intentional object, intended as it is intended, remains
the same: its ‘matter’, in other words, stays the same. Matter and fulness are,
however, by no means unrelated and, when we range an intuitive act alongside a signitive act to which it brings fulness, the former act does not differ
from the latter merely by the joining on of a third distinct moment of fulness
to the quality and matter common to the two acts. This at least is not the
case where we mean by ‘fulness’ the intuitive content of intuition. For intuitive content itself already includes a complete ‘matter’, the matter of an act
reduced to a pure intuition. If the intuitive act in question was already purely
intuitive, its matter also would be a constituent of its intuitive content.
The relations which obtain here will be best set forth by establishing the
following parallelism between signitive and intuitive acts.
A purely signitive act would be a mere complex of quality and matter, if
indeed it could exist by itself at all, i.e. be a concrete experiential unity ‘on
its own’. This it cannot be: we always ﬁnd it clinging to some intuitive basis.
This intuition of a sign may have ‘nothing at all to do’ with the object of the
signiﬁcative act, it may stand to it in no relation of fulﬁlment, but it realizes
its possibility in concreto of being an altogether unfulﬁlled act. The following proposition therefore seems to hold: An act of signiﬁcation is only poss-

The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge

321

ible in so far as an intuition becomes endued with a new intentional essence,
whereby its intuitive object points beyond itself in the manner of a sign
(whether as a sign regularly or ﬂeetingly used). More closely considered, this
proposition does not, however, seem to express the necessities of connection
which obtain here with the needed analytic clearness, and perhaps says more
than is justiﬁed. For we can, it seems, say that it is not our founding intuition
as a whole, but only its representational content, which really assists the
signitive act. For what goes beyond this content, what pins down the sign as
a natural object, can be varied at will without disturbing the sign’s signitive
function. Whether the letters of a verbal sign are of wood, iron or printer’s
ink etc., or seem to be such objectively, makes no difference. Only their
repeatedly recognizable shape is relevant, not as the objective shape of the
thing of wood etc., but as the shape actually present in the intuitively presentative sensuous content of intuition. If there is only a connection between
the signitive act and the intuitively presentative content of our intuition, and
if the quality and matter of this intuition mean nothing to this signitive
function, then we ought not to say that each signitive act requires a founding
intuition, but only that it requires a founding content. It would seem that
any content can function in this fashion, just as any content can function as
the intuitively presentative content of an intuition.
If we now turn our regard to the parallel case of the purely intuitive act,
its quality and matter (its intentional essence) are not capable of separate
existence on their own: here too a supplement is required. This is furnished
by the representative content, i.e. the content – sensuous in the case of a
sensuous intuition – which in its present fusion with an intentional essence
has acquired the character of being an intuitive representative. If we bear in
mind the fact that the same (e.g. sensuous) content can at one time carry a
meaning, and at another time an intuition – denoting in one case and picturing in the other – we are led to widen the notion of a representative content,
and to distinguish between contents which represent signitively (signitive representatives) and contents which represent intuitively (intuitive representatives).
Our division is, however, incomplete. We have so far considered only the
purely intuitive or purely signitive acts. If we bring in the mixed acts as well,
those we ordinarily class as intuitive, we ﬁnd them peculiar in the fact that
their representative content is pictorial or self-presentative in respect of one
part of what it objectively presents, while being merely denotative as to the
remaining part. We must accordingly range mixed representatives beside
purely signitive and purely intuitive representatives: these represent signitively
and intuitively at the same time, and in regard to the same intentional essence.
We may now say:
Each concretely complete objectifying act has three components: its quality,
its matter and its representative content. To the extent that this content
functions as a purely signitive or purely intuitive representative, or as both
together, the act is a purely signitive, a purely intuitive or a mixed act.

322 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

§26 Continuation. Representation or interpretation
(Auffassung). Matter as the interpretative sense, the
interpretative form and the interpreted content.
Differentiating characterization of intuitive and
signitive interpretation
We may now ask what this ‘functioning’ really stands for, since we have it as
an a priori possibility that the same content, bound up with the same quality
and matter, should function in this threefold manner. It is plain that it can
only be the phenomenological peculiarity of the relevant form of unity that
can give a phenomenologically discoverable content to our distinction. This
form specially unites the matter to the representative content, since the
representative function is unaffected by change in the quality. Whether, e.g.,
an imaginative picturing claims to be the calling up of a real object or to be
merely imaginative, makes no difference to its pictorially presentative character, that its content bears the function of an image-content. We therefore
call the phonomenological union of matter with representative content, in so far
as it lends the latter its representative character, the form of representation,
and the whole engendered by these two moments the representation pure and
simple. This designation expresses the relation between representing and
represented content (latter = the object or part of the object represented) by
going back to its phenomenological foundation. Leaving aside the object as
something not phenomenologically given, and endeavouring merely to express the fact that, when a content functions representatively, we are always
differently ‘minded’, we may speak of a change in interpretation (Auffassung).
We may also call the form of representation the interpretative form. Since
the matter after a manner ﬁxes the sense in which the representative content
is interpreted, we may also speak of the interpretative sense. If we wish to
recall the older term, and at the same time indicate an opposition to form, we
may also speak of the interpretative matter. In each interpretation we must
therefore distinguish phenomenologically between: interpretative matter or
sense, interpretative form and interpreted content; this last is to be distinguished
from the object of the interpretation. The term ‘apperception’ is unsuitable
despite its historical provenance, on account of its misleading terminological opposition to ‘perception’; ‘apprehension’ would be more usable.
Our next question concerns the distinguishing marks of the various modes
of representation or interpretation which, as we saw, can be different even
when the interpretative matter – the ‘as what’ of interpretation – is constant.
In the previous chapter we characterized differences of representations
through differences in forms of fulﬁlment, in the present context we have
regard to an internal characterization limited to the proper descriptive stuff
of intentions. If we may make use of the beginnings of an analytical clariﬁcation which our previous treatment suggested, as well as of our subsequent
advances in the general grasp of ‘representation’, the following train of ideas
suggests itself:

The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge

323

We begin with the observation that signitive representation institutes a
contingent, external relation between matter and representative content,
whereas intuitive representation institutes one that is essential, internal. The
contingency of the former consists in the fact that an identical signiﬁcation
can be thought of as attached to every content whatsoever. Signiﬁcative matter has a general need for supporting content, but between the speciﬁc nature
of the former and the speciﬁc being of the latter no bond of necessity can be
found. Meaning cannot, as it were, hang in the air, but for what it means,
the sign, whose meaning we call it, is entirely indifferent.
The case of purely intuitive representation is quite different. Here there is
an internal, necessary connection between matter and representing content,
ﬁxed by the speciﬁc stuff of both. Only those contents can be intuitively
representative of an object that resemble it or are like it. Phenomenologically put: we are not wholly free to interpret a content as this or as that (or
in this or that interpretative sense) and this has more than an empirical
foundation – every interpretation including a signiﬁcative one is empirically
necessary – since the content to be interpreted sets limits to us through a
certain sphere of similarity and exact likeness, i.e. through its speciﬁc substance. The internality of the relation does not merely forge a link between
the interpretative matter as a whole and the whole content: it links their parts
on each side piece by piece. This occurs in the presupposed case of pure
intuition. In the case of impure intuition the speciﬁc union is partial: a part
of the matter – the matter of the reduced, and therefore, of course, pure,
intuition – provides the intuitive sense in which the content is interpreted,
while the remainder of the matter undergoes no representation through
similarity or exact likeness, but merely through contiguity, i.e. in mixed
intuition the representative content functions as intuitive representative for
one part of the matter, but as signitive representative for the remaining part.
If one ﬁnally asks how one and the same content (in the sense of ‘same matter’) can at times be ‘taken up’ in the manner of an intuitive, and at times
in the manner of a signitive representative, in what the differing nature of
these interpretative forms consists, I can give them no further answer. We
are facing a difference that cannot be phenomenologically reduced.
In these discussions we have treated representation independently as a
union of matter and representative content. If we go back again to the
complete acts, these reveal themselves as combinations of act-quality with
either intuitive or signitive representation. The whole acts are called intuitive or signitive, a difference determined by these inwrought representations.
The study of relations of fulﬁlment led us above to the concept of intuitive
substance or fulness. If we compare that case of concept-formation with the
present one, it sets bounds to the purely intuitive representation (i.e. pure
intuition) that belongs to an act of impure intuition. ‘Fulness’ was a notion
specially framed for the comparative treatment of acts in their fulﬁlling
function. The limiting case opposed to pure intuition, pure signiﬁcation, is
of course the same as purely signitive representation.

324 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

§29 Complete and defective intuitions. Adequate
and objectively complete intuitive illustrations.
Essentia (Essenz)
In an intuitive presentation a varying amount of intuitive fulness is possible.
This talk of a varying amount points, as we argued, to possible gradients
of fulﬁlment: proceeding along these, we come to know the object better
and better, by way of a presentative content that resembles it ever more and
more closely, and grasps it more and more vividly and fully. We know also
that intuition can occur where whole sides and parts of the object meant are
not apparent at all, i.e. the presentation has an intuitive content not containing pictorial representatives of these sides and parts, so that they are
only presented ‘inauthentically’, through inwrought signitive intentions.
In connection with these differences, which result in very different modes of
presentation for one and the same object, with meaning governed by the
same matter, we spoke above of differences in the extent of fulness. Here
two important possibilities must be distinguished.
1. The intuitive presentation presents its object adequately, i.e. with an
intuitive substance (Gehalt) of such fulness, that to each constituent of the
object, as it is meant in this presentation, a representative constituent of the
intuitive content corresponds.
2. Or this is not the case. The presentation contains no more than an
incomplete projection of the object: it presents it inadequately.
Here we are talking of the adequacy or inadequacy of a presentation to
its object. Since, however, we speak more widely of adequacy in contexts
of fulﬁlment, we introduce yet another set of terms. We shall speak of complete and defective intuitions (more particularly of complete and mutilated
percepts or imaginations). All pure intuitions are complete. The following
considerations will at once show that the converse does not hold, and that
our proposed division does not simply coincide with that of pure and impure
intuitions.
Whether presentations are simple or complex is a matter regarding which
nothing is presupposed in the distinction just drawn. Intuitive presentations
may, however, be complex in two ways:
(a) The relation to the object may be simple in so far as the act (more
speciﬁcally, its matter) has no constituent acts (or no separate matters) that
independently present the same total object. This does not preclude the possibility that an act should be made up of partial intentions homogeneously
fused, which relate to the individual parts or sides of its object. One can
scarcely avoid assuming such complexity in the case of ‘external’ percepts
and imaginations, and we have proceeded on this assumption. But, on the
other hand we have
(b) the kind of complexity in which the total act is built out of constituent acts, each of which independently is a full intuitive presentation of

The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge

325

the same object. This we have in those extremely remarkable continuous
syntheses which bind together a multitude of percepts which pertain to the
same object, into a single ‘many-sided’ or ‘all-sided’ percept, which deals with
the object continuously in ‘varying positions’. There are the corresponding
syntheses of imagination. In the continuity of a prolonged fusion-intosameness not broken up into isolated acts, the same single object appears
singly, not as often as individual acts can be distinguished. It appears, however, with altering fulness of content, though the matters, and likewise the
qualities remain steadfastly the same, at least when the object is known from
all angles, and repeatedly comes to light in its unenriched familiarity.
The distinction between adequacy and inadequacy relates also to these
continuous syntheses. An adequate presentation of, e.g., an external thing is
possible in synthetic form in respect of its all-sided surface-contours: in the
form of an objectively simple presentation, it is impossible.
Of complete intuitions it is plain that objectively simple ones, but by
no means always objectively complex ones, are pure intuitions. The pure
intuition which corresponds to an empirical thing is denied to us, it lies
hidden after a fashion in the complete synthetic intuition itself, but as it
were dispersedly, with a perpetual admixture of signitive representation. If
we reduce this synthetic intuition to its pure form, we do not have the pure
intuition possible in an objectively simple presentation, but a continuum of
intuitive contents, in which each aspect of the object quite often achieves
intuitive representation, achieves ever varied perspectival projection, and in
which only the continuous fusion of identity constitutes the phenomenon of
objective unity.
When an intuitive fact serves to give fulness in connection with a signitive
intention, perhaps in connection with a meaning-intention expressed in words,
similar possibilities arise. The object as it is meant can receive an adequate
or an inadequate intuitive illustration. The former possibility covers two
separable possibilities in the case of complex meanings:
First, that to all parts (members, moments, forms) of the meaning, which
themselves have a meaning-character, fulﬁlment should accrue through corresponding parts of the fulﬁlling intuition.
Secondly, that the fulﬁlling intuition, to the extent that its object is meant
in any articulations and forms which have been drawn into the function of
fulﬁlment, is intrinsically adequate to its object.
The ﬁrst determines the completeness of the adaptation of signitive acts
to corresponding intuitions; the second the completeness of the adaptation of
signitive acts – through complete intuitions – to the object itself.
The expression ‘a green house’ can thus be intuitively illustrated if a
house is really present to our intuition as green. This is a case of the ﬁrst
perfection. The second requires an adequate presentation of a green house.
We generally only have the former in mind when we speak of an adequate
illustration of expressions. To ﬁnd distinct terms for this double perfection

326 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

we shall speak of an objectively perfect intuitive illustration of our signitive
presentation as opposed to its adequate, but objectively defective, intuitive
illustration.
Similar relationships obtain in the case of an intuitive illustration which
conﬂicts with, rather than fulﬁlling a meaning. When a signitive intention
encounters frustration from an intuition, because perhaps it refers to a green
A, though the same A, perhaps any A at all, is red, and is now intuited as
red, the objective completeness of the intuitive realization of conﬂict requires
that all constituents of the meaning-intention should ﬁnd an objectively
complete intuitive illustration. It is therefore necessary, not merely that
the A-intention should receive complete objective fulﬁlment in the intuition
in question, but also that the green-intuition should be fulﬁlled, though
naturally in another intuition which cannot be united to the intuition of
the red A. It is not then merely the signitive green-intention, but the same
intention in its objectively complete fulﬁlment, which is at odds with the
red-intuition: these two intuitive moments are in total ‘rivalry’, while the correlative intuitive wholes are in partial rivalry. This rivalry especially touches,
as one might say, the intuitive or intuitively presentative contents of these
fulﬁlling acts.
If nothing special is prefaced we shall in future speak of ‘intuitive illustrations’ only in the case of fulﬁlments (not frustrations).
Distinctions of fulness in cases where quality and matter are identical,
prompt us to frame one further important concept:
We shall say that two intuitive acts have the same essentia (Essenz), if
their pure intuitions have the same matter. A percept, and the whole possibly
existent inﬁnity of imaginative presentations, which all present the same
object with the same breadth of fulness, have one and the same essentia. All
objectively complete intuitions with one and the same matter have the same
essentia.
A signitive presentation has no essentia in its own right. But a certain
essentia may, in an inauthentic sense, be ascribed to it, if it permits of complete fulﬁlment through one of the possible manifold of intuitions pertaining
to this essentia, or, what is the same, if it has a ‘fulﬁlling sense’.
This probably clariﬁes the true meaning of the scholastic term essentia,
which certainly hinges on the possibility of a ‘concept’.

Chapter 5

The ideal of adequation.
Self-evidence and truth

§36 Introduction
In our discussions up to this point we have said nothing of the qualities of
acts, nor presumed anything in regard to them. Possibility and impossibility
have indeed no special relation to these qualities. It makes no difference,
e.g., to the possibility of a proposition, whether we realize the propositional
matter as matter for an act of assertion (not of an act that assents to something in the accepting or recognizing manner of approval, but in the manner
of a simple act of belief or taking for true), or whether we use it, in qualitatively modiﬁed fashion, as the matter of a pure presentation. A proposition
is always ‘possible’, when the concrete act of propositional meaning permits
of a fulﬁlling identiﬁcation with an objectively complete intuition of matching material. It is likewise irrelevant if this fulﬁlling intuition is a percept, or
a pure construction of fantasy, etc. Since the summoning up of imaginative
pictures is more subject, in varying degrees, to our will, than that of percepts
and assertions, we incline to relate possibility specially to the picture-life of
fantasy. A thing counts as possible, if it allows itself, objectively speaking,
to be realized in the form of an adequate imaginative picture, whether we
ourselves, as particular empirical individuals, succeed in thus realizing it or
not. But through the ideal linkage between perception and imagination,
which assures us a priori that to each percept a possible image corresponds,
this proposition is equivalent to our own, and the limitation of the concept
to imagination not essential.
What we have now to do, quite brieﬂy, is to discuss the effect of these just
indicated differences upon relationships of fulﬁlment, so that our treatments
may at least reach a provisional term, as well as a view over further researches.

§37 The fulfilling function of perception. The ideal
of ultimate fulfilment
We have seen that differences in the completeness of ‘fulness’ have an
important bearing on the manner in which objects are made present in

328 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

presentations. Signitive acts constitute the lowest step: they possess no fulness
whatever. Intuitive acts have fulness, in graded differences of more and less,
and this is already the case within the sphere of imagination. The perfection
of an imagination, however great, still leaves it different from a perception:
it does not present the object itself, not even in part, it offers only its image,
which, as long as it is an image at all, never is the thing itself. The latter we
owe to perception. Even this, however, ‘gives’ us the object in varied gradations of perfection, in differing degrees of ‘projection’. The intentional character of perception, as opposed to the mere representation of imagination,
is that of direct presentation. This is, as we know, an internal difference of
acts, more precisely of their interpretative form. But ‘direct’ presentation
does not in general amount to a true being-present, but only to an appearance of presence, in which objective presence, and with it the perfection of
veridicity (Wahr-nehmung, perception) exhibits degrees. This is shown by a
glance at the corresponding scale of fulﬁlment, to which all exempliﬁcation
of perfection in presentation is here, as elsewhere, referred. We thereby
become clear that a difference extends over the fulness of perception that we
sought to cover by our talk of perceptual projection, a difference that does
not concern fulness in respect of its sensuous stuff, its internal character, but
means a graded extension of its character as fulness, i.e. of the interpretative
character of the act. From this point of view many elements of fulness count
for us – quite apart from anything genetic, for we know full well that these,
like all similar differences, have an associative origin – as ﬁnal presentations
of the corresponding objective elements. They offer themselves as identical
with these last, not as their mere representatives: they are the thing itself in
an absolute sense. Other cases again count as mere adumbrations of colour,
perspectival foreshortenings etc., in which case it is clear that to such locutions
something corresponds in the phenomenological content of the act prior to
all reﬂection. We have already dealt with these ‘projective’ differences, and
found them, pictorially transferred, in the case of imagination. Every projection is representative in character, and represents by way of similarity,
but the manner of this representation by similarity differs according as the
representation takes the projected content as picture or self-presentation
(self-projection) of the object.1 The ideal limit, which an increase of fulness
of projection permits, is, in the case of perception, the absolute self of the
thing (as in imagination it is its absolutely resembling image), and that for
every side and for every presented element of the object.
The discussion of possible relationships of fulﬁlment therefore points to
a goal in which increase of fulﬁlment terminates, in which the complete and
entire intention has reached its fulﬁlment, and that not intermediately and
partially, but ultimately and ﬁnally. The intuitive substance of this last fulﬁlment is the absolute sum of possible fulness; the intuitive representative is
the object itself, as it is in itself. Where a presentative intention has achieved
its last fulﬁlment, the genuine adaequatio rei et intellectus has been brought

The ideal of adequation. Self-evidence and truth 329

about. The object is actually ‘present’ or ‘given’, and present as just what
we have intended it; no partial intention remains implicit and still lacking
fulﬁlment.
And so also, eo ipso, the ideal of every fulﬁlment, and therefore of a
signiﬁcative fulﬁlment, is sketched for us; the intellectus is in this case the
thought-intention, the intention of meaning. And the adaequatio is realized
when the object meant is in the strict sense given in our intuition, and given
as just what we think and call it. No thought-intention could fail of its
fulﬁlment, of its last fulﬁlment, in fact, in so far as the fulﬁlling medium of
intuition has itself lost all implication of unsatisﬁed intentions.
One sees that the perfection of the adequation of thought to thing is
twofold: on the one hand there is a perfect adaptation to intuition, since the
thought means nothing that the fulﬁlling intuition does not completely present
as belonging to the thought. In this the two previously (§29) distinguished
‘perfections’ are plainly comprehended: they yield what we called the
‘objective completeness’ of the fulﬁlment. On the other hand the complete
intuition itself involves a perfection. The intuition fulﬁls the intention
which terminates in it as not itself again being an intention which has need
of further fulﬁlment, but as offering us the last fulﬁlment of our intention.
We must therefore draw a distinction between the perfection of the adaptation
to intuition, which is ‘adequation’ in the natural, wider sense, and the perfection of ﬁnal fulﬁlment which presupposes this fulﬁlment, and which is an
adequation with the ‘thing itself ’. Each faithful, unalloyed description of an
intuitive object or event provides an example of the former perfection. If the
object is something in interior experience, and is grasped as it is in reﬂex
perception, then the second perfection may be added, as when, for instance,
looking back on a categorical judgement just made, we speak of the subjectpresentation in this judgement. The ﬁrst perfection is, however, lacking,
when we call the tree standing before us a ‘cultivated’ variety of apple-tree,
or when we speak of the ‘vibratory frequency’ of the note just dying away,
or, in general, when we speak of such properties of perceptual objects as,
however much they may be marginally meant in our perceiving intention,
are not even more or less projectively present in what actually appears.
The following observation is also in place. Since an ultimate fulﬁlment
may contain absolutely no unfulﬁlled intentions, it must issue out of a pure
percept. An objectively complete percept, but one achieved by the continuous synthesis of impure percepts, will not ﬁll the bill.
Against our mode of treatment, which places the ﬁnal fulﬁlment of all
intentions in perception, it may be objected that the realized consciousness of the universal, the consciousness which gives fulness to conceptually
general presentations, and which sets the ‘universal object itself’ before
our eyes, rests on a ground of mere imagination, or is at least indifferent to
the difference between perception and imagination. The same is obviously
true, as a consequence of what has just been said, of all self-evident general

330 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

assertions, which make themselves plain to us, in axiomatic fashion, ‘from
our very notions alone’.
This objection points to a gap in our investigation that has already been
touched on from time to time. We ﬁrst took perception, with immediate
obviousness, as being the same as sense-perception, intuition as being the
same as sensuous intuition. Tacitly, without any clear consciousness, we
have frequently gone beyond the bounds of these notions, e.g. in connection
with our discussions of compatibility. We regularly did this, when, e.g., we
spoke of intuiting a conﬂict or a union, or some other synthesis as such. In
our next chapter, which deals generally with categorial forms we shall show
the need to widen the concepts of perception and other sorts of intuition.
To remove our objection, we shall now only say that the imagination, which
serves as basis for generalizing abstraction, does not therefore exercise an
actual, authentic function of fulﬁlment, and so does not play the part of a
‘corresponding’ intuition. What is individually singular in phenomena, is not
itself, as we have several times stressed, the universal, nor does it contain the
universal as a real (reell ) ‘piece’ of itself.

§38 Positing acts in the function of fulfilment.
Self-evidence in the loose and strict sense
Under the rubric of ‘intentions’, positing and non-positing acts have so far
been indiscriminately ranged. Nonetheless, though the general character of
fulﬁlment essentially depends on the ‘matter’ of acts, which alone is relevant
to an array of most important relationships, the quality of acts shares in
the determination of others, and to such a degree that talk of intention, of
directed aiming, really only seems to suit assertive acts. Our thought (Meinung)
aims at a thing, and it hits its mark, or does not hit it, according as it agrees
or does not agree in a certain way with perception (which is here an assertive act). Positing then agrees with positing: the intending and fulﬁlling act
are alike in this quality. Mere presentation, however, is passive: it leaves
matters ‘in suspense’. Where by chance an adequate percept accompanies a
mere presentation, a fulﬁlling coincidence certainly issues from the mutually ﬁtting ‘matters’ of the acts: in the transition, however, the presentation
acquires an assertive note, and the unity of coincidence itself certainly has
this note quite homogeneously. Each actual identiﬁcation or differentiation
is an assertive act, whether itself founded on assertions or not. This last
brieﬂy-worded proposition adds an all-important characterization to the
results of our last chapter, a characterization determining all relationships
of compatibility: the theory of identiﬁcations and differentiations thereby
reveals itself, with more clearness than before, as a chapter in the theory of
judgement. For according as positing or non-positing acts function in our
intentions or their fulﬁlments, they illuminate distinctions like that between
illustration, perhaps exempliﬁcation, on the one hand, and veriﬁcation or

The ideal of adequation. Self-evidence and truth 331

conﬁrmation and its opposite refutation, on the other. The concept of veriﬁcation relates exclusively to positing acts in relation to their positing fulﬁlment,
and ultimately to their fulﬁlment through percepts.
To this last pre-eminent case we now give closer consideration. It is a case
in which the ideal of adequation yields us self-evidence (Evidenz). We speak
somewhat loosely of self-evidence wherever a positing intention (a statement
in particular) ﬁnds veriﬁcation in a corresponding, fully accommodated percept, even if this be no more than a well-ﬁtting synthesis of coherent single
percepts. To speak of degrees and levels of self-evidence then has a good
sense. Here are relevant all approximations of percepts to the objective
completeness of their presentation of their object, all further steps towards
the ﬁnal ideal of perfection, the ideal of adequate perception, of the complete
self-manifestation of the object, however it was referred to in the intention
to be fulﬁlled. But the epistemologically pregnant sense of self-evidence is
exclusively concerned with this last unsurpassable goal, the act of this most
perfect synthesis of fulﬁlment, which gives to an intention, e.g. the intention
of judgement, the absolute fulness of content, the fulness of the object itself.
The object is not merely meant, but in the strictest sense given, and given as
it is meant, and made one with our meaning-reference. It does not matter,
for the rest, whether one is dealing with an individual or a universal object,
with an object in the narrower sense or with a state of affairs, the correlate
of an identifying or distinguishing synthesis.
Self-evidence itself, we said, is the act of this most perfect synthesis of
coincidence. Like every identiﬁcation, it is an objectifying act, its objective
correlate being called being in the sense of truth, or simply truth – if one does
not prefer to award this term to another concept of the many that are
rooted in the said phenomenological situation. Here, however, a closer discussion is needed.

§39 Self-evidence and truth
1. If we at ﬁrst keep to the notion of truth just suggested, truth as the
correlate of an identifying act is a state of affairs (Sachverhalt), as the correlate of a coincident identity it is an identity: the full agreement of what
is meant with what is given as such. This agreement we experience in selfevidence, in so far as self-evidence means the actual carrying out of an
adequate identiﬁcation. The proposition that self-evidence is the ‘experience’ of truth cannot, however, be simply interpreted as telling us that the
self-evidence is the perception (in a sufﬁciently wide sense) of truth and, in
the case of strict self-evidence, the adequate perception of truth. For, to recur
to a previously voiced doubt (see the addendum to §8 and chapter 7), we
must allow that the carrying out of an identifying coincidence is not as yet
an actual perception of objective agreement, but becomes so only through
its own act of objectifying interpretation, its own looking towards present

332 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

truth. Truth is indeed ‘present’. Here we have always the a priori possibility
of looking towards this agreement, and of laying it before our intentional
consciousness in an adequate percept.
2. A second concept of truth concerns the ideal relationship which obtains
in the unity of coincidence which we deﬁned as self-evidence, among the
epistemic essences of the coinciding acts. While truth in sense 1 was the
objective item corresponding to the act of self-evidence, truth in this sense is
the Idea which belongs to the act-form: the epistemic essence interpreted as
the ideal essence of the empirically contingent act of self-evidence, the Idea of
absolute adequation as such.
3. We also experience in self-evidence, from the side of the act which
furnishes ‘fulness’, the object given in the manner of the object meant: so
given, the object is fulness itself. This object can also be called being, truth,
the ‘truth’ in so far as it is here not experienced as in the merely adequate
percept, but as the ideal fulness for an intention, as that which makes an
intention true (or as the ideal fulness for the intention’s speciﬁc epistemic
essence).
4. Lastly, considered from the standpoint of the intention, the notion of
the relationship of self-evidence yields us truth as the rightness of our intention (and especially that of our judgement), its adequacy to its true object,
or the rightness of the intention’s epistemic essence in specie. We have, in the
latter regard, the rightness, e.g., of the judgement in the logical sense of
the proposition: the proposition ‘directs’ itself to the thing itself, it says that
it is so, and it really is so. In this we have the expression of the ideal, and
therefore general, possibility that a proposition of such and such a ‘matter’
admits of fulﬁlment in the sense of the most rigorous adequation.
We must further particularly note that the ‘being’ here in question in our
ﬁrst objective sense of truth, is not to be confused with the ‘being’ covered by
the copula in the afﬁrmative categorical judgement. Self-evidence is a matter
of total coincidence, whereas the ‘being’ of the copula corresponds generally,
if not invariably to partial identiﬁcations (i.e. judgements of quality).
But even where total identiﬁcation is predicated, the two ‘beings’ will not
coincide. For we must observe that in the case of a self-evident judgement,
i.e. of a self-evident predicative assertion, being in the sense of truth is experienced but not expressed, and so never coincides with the being meant and
experienced in the ‘is’ of the assertion. This second ‘being’ is the synthetic
moment in what is in the sense of is true – how could it express the fact that
the latter is true ? There are in fact several agreements which are here brought
to synthesis: one of these, the partial, predicative one, is meant assertively
and perceived adequately, and so self-presented. (What this means will
become clearer in the next chapter by way of the more general doctrine of
categorial objectiﬁcation.) This is the agreement of subject with predicate, the
suiting of predicate to subject. We have, in the second place, the agreement
which constitutes the synthetic form of the act of self-evidence, and therefore

The ideal of adequation. Self-evidence and truth 333

of the total coincidence of the meaning-intention of our assertion with the
percept of the state of affairs itself, a coincidence naturally achieved in
stages, which do not here concern us further. This agreement is plainly not
asserted, it is not objective like the ﬁrst agreement, which belongs to the
state of affairs judged. No doubt it can always be asserted and asserted with
self-evidence. It then becomes the verifying state of affairs for a new selfevidence, of which the like is true, and so on. At each step, however, one
must distinguish the verifying state of affairs from the state of affairs constitutive of the self-evidence itself, we must distinguish the objectiﬁed from
the not-objectiﬁed state of affairs.
The distinctions just drawn lead to the following general discussion.
In our exposition of the relationships of the concepts of self-evidence and
truth, we have not drawn a distinction which touches the objective side of
the acts which, whether functioning as intentions or fulﬁlments, ﬁnd their
absolute adequation in self-evidence: we have not, that is, distinguished
between states of affairs, on the one hand, and other objects, on the other.
We have paid no heed, correspondingly, to the phenomenological difference
between acts which relate, on the one hand – acts of agreement and disagreement, predicative acts – and acts which do not relate, on the other. We
have paid no need, therefore, to the difference between relational and nonrelational meanings, or to the relational-non-relational distinction among
ideally apprehended essences in general. Strict adequation can bring nonrelating as much as relating intentions into union with their complete
fulﬁlments. If we now particularly consider the ﬁeld of expressions, we need
not concern ourselves with judgements as assertive intentions or assertive
fulﬁlments; acts of naming can also achieve their adequation. The concepts
of truth, rightness, the true, are generally interpreted more narrowly than
we have done: they are connected with judgements and propositions, or
with the states of affairs which are their objective correlates. ‘Being’ is meanwhile mainly spoken of in relation to absolute objects (not states of affairs),
though no deﬁnite lines are drawn. Our right to our more general interpretation of these concepts is unassailable. The very nature of the case demands
that the concepts of truth and falsehood, should, in the ﬁrst instance at
least, be ﬁxed so widely as to span the whole sphere of objectifying acts. It
seems therefore most suitable that the concepts of truth and being should be
so distinguished, that our concepts of truth – a certain range of equivocation remaining inevitable but hardly dangerous once our concepts are
clariﬁed – are applied from the side of the acts themselves and their ideally
graspable moments, whereas the concepts of being (genuine being) are
applied to the corresponding objective correlates. Truth would then have to
be deﬁned in the manner of (2) and (4) as the Idea of adequation, or as the
rightness of objectifying assertion and meaning. Being would then have to
be pinned down according to (1) and (3) as the identity of the object at once
meant and given in adequation, or (in conformity with the natural sense of

334 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

words) as the adequately perceivable thing as such, in an indeﬁnite relation
to an intention that it is to make true or fulﬁl adequately.
After our concepts have been thus widely ﬁxed and assured phenomenologically, we may pass on, having regard to the distinction between
relational and non-relational acts (predications versus absolute assertions)
to deﬁne narrower concepts of truth and being. The narrower concept of
truth would be limited to the ideal adequation of a relational act to the
corresponding adequate percept of a state of affairs: just so the narrower
concept of being would concern the being of absolute objects, and would
separate this off from the ‘subsistence’ of the state of affairs.
The following is accordingly clear: if one deﬁnes a judgement as an assertive act in general, then the sphere of judgement, subjectively speaking,
coincides with the joint spheres of the concepts true and false in the widest
sense of these words. But if one deﬁnes it by way of the statement and its
possible fulﬁlment, and ranges under judgements only the sphere of relational assertions, then the same coincidence obtains again, provided that the
narrower concepts of truth and falsehood are again used as a basis.
In one-sided fashion we have hitherto favoured the case of self-evidence,
the act described as one of total coincidence. But, turning to the correlated
case of conﬂict, we encounter absurdity, the experience of the total conﬂict
between intention and quasi-fulﬁlment. To the concepts of truth and being
the correlated concepts of falsehood and non-being then correspond. The
phenomenological clariﬁcation of these concepts can be carried out without
particular difﬁculty, once all foundations have been prepared. The negative
ideal of an ultimate frustration would ﬁrst have to be exactly circumscribed.
When self-evidence is conceived strictly, in the manner made basic
here, it is plain that such doubts as have from time to time been expressed
in modern times are absurd, doubts as to whether the experience of selfevidence might not be associated with the matter A for one man, while
absurdity is associated with it for another. Such doubts are only possible as
long as self-evidence and absurdity are interpreted as peculiar (positive or
negative) feelings which, contingently attaching to the act of judgement,
impart to the latter the speciﬁc features which we assess logically as truth
and falsehood. If someone experiences the self-evidence of A, it is selfevident that no second person can experience the absurdity of this same A,
for, that A is self-evident, means that A is not merely meant, but also genuinely given, and given as precisely what it is thought to be. In the strict sense
it is itself present. But how could a second person refer in thought to this
same thing A, while the thought that it is A is genuinely excluded by a
genuinely given non-A? One is, it is plain, dealing with a matter of essence,
the same matter, in fact, that the law of contradiction (into whose ambiguities
the correlations discussed in §39, naturally enter) successfully expresses.
It is reliably clear, as a result of our analyses, that being and non-being
are not concepts which in their origin express opposition among the qualities

The ideal of adequation. Self-evidence and truth 335

of our judgements. Following our interpretation of the phenomenological
relationships involved, every judgement is assertive: this assertion does not
characterize the ‘is’ of which the ‘is not’ is the qualitative contrary. The
qualitative contrary of a judgement is a mere presentation having the same
‘matter’. Differences between ‘is’ and ‘is not’ are differences in intentional
‘matter’. Just as an ‘is’ expresses predicative agreement after the manner of
a meaning-intention, so an ‘is not’ expresses a predicative conﬂict.

H

Second Section

Sense and understanding

HH

Chapter 6

Sensuous and categorial intuitions

§40 The problem of the fulfilment of categorial
meaning-forms, with a thought leading towards
its solution
In our discussions up to this point we have repeatedly and strongly felt a
large gap. It had to do with the categorial objective forms, or with the
synthetic functions in the sphere of objectifying acts through which these
objective forms come to be constituted, through which they may come to
‘intuition’ and thereby also to ‘knowledge’. We shall now attempt to some
extent to ﬁll in this gap, taking our point of departure from the investigation
of our ﬁrst chapter; this was concerned with one limited aim of epistemological clariﬁcation: the relation of a meaning-intention as the thing to be
expressed, with an expressed sensuous intuition. We shall for the time being
again build on the simplest cases of perceptual and other intuitive statements, and shall use them to shed light on the theme of our next treatments,
in the following manner:
In the case of a perceptual statement, not only the inwrought nominal
presentations are fulﬁlled: the whole sense of the statement ﬁnds fulﬁlment
through our underlying percept. We say likewise that the whole statement
gives utterance to our percept: we do not merely say ‘I see this paper, an
inkpot, several books’, and so on, but also ‘I see that the paper has been
written on, that there is a bronze inkpot standing here, that several books
are lying open’, and so on. If a man thinks the fulﬁlment of nominal meanings clear enough, we shall ask him how we are to understand the fulﬁlment
of total statements, especially as regards that side of them that stretches
beyond their ‘matter’, in this case beyond their nominal terms. What may
and can furnish fulﬁlment for those aspects of meaning which make up
propositional form as such, the aspects of ‘categorial form’ to which, e.g.,
the copula belongs?
Looked at more narrowly, this question also applies to nominal meanings,
in so far as these are not totally formless like the meanings for individuals.
The name, like the statement, even in its grammatical appearance, possesses

340 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

both ‘matter’ and ‘form’. If it comprises words, the form lies partly in the
way these words are strung together, partly in its own form-words, partly in
the mode of construction of the individual words, which allows us to draw a
distinction between its moments of ‘matter’ and its moments of ‘form’. Such
grammatical distinctions refer us back to distinctions of meaning. There is
at least a rough expression of the articulations and forms which are rooted
in our meaning’s essence and the articulations and forms of grammar. In
our meanings, therefore, parts of very different kinds are to be found, and
among these we may here pay special attention to those expressed by formal
words such as ‘the’, ‘a’, ‘some’, ‘many’, ‘few’, ‘two’, ‘is’, ‘not’, ‘which’, ‘and’,
‘or’ etc., and further expressed by the substantival and adjectival, singular
and plural inﬂection of our words etc.
How does all this stand as regards fulﬁlment? Can the ideal of completely
adequate fulﬁlment formulated by us in our third chapter still be maintained? Are there parts and forms of perception corresponding to all parts and
forms of meaning? In that case we should have the parallelism between meaningful reference and fulﬁlling intuition that talk of ‘expression’ suggests.
The expression would be an image-like counterpart of the percept (i.e. in all
its parts and forms to be expressed) but reconstituted in a new stuff – an
ex-pression in the stuff of meaning.
The prototype for interpreting the relation between meaning and intuiting would then be the relation of the ‘proper’ individual meaning to corresponding percepts. The man who knows Cologne itself, and therefore
possesses the genuine ‘proper meaning’ of the word ‘Cologne’, has in his
contemporary actual experience something exactly corresponding to the
future conﬁrming percept. It is not, properly speaking, a representation of
the percept, as, e.g., the corresponding imagination would be. But just as
the city is thought to be itself present to us in the percept, so the proper
name ‘Cologne’, in its ‘proper meaning’, refers, as previously argued, to the
same city ‘directly’: it means that city itself, and as it is. The straightforward
percept here renders the object apparent without the help of further, superordinate acts, the object which the meaning-intention means, and just as the
latter means it. The meaning-intention therefore ﬁnds in the mere percept
the act which fulﬁls it with complete adequacy.
If instead of considering directly naming, unstructured expressions, we
rather consider structured, articulated expressions, the matter seems quite
the same. I see white paper and say ‘white paper’, thereby expressing, with
precise adequacy, only what I see. The same holds of complete judgements.
I see that this paper is white, and express just this by saying: ‘This paper is
white’.
We are not to let ourselves be led astray by such ways of speaking; they
are in a certain manner correct, yet are readily misunderstood. One might
try to use them to show that meaning here has its seat in perception, which,
as we have shown, is not so. The word ‘white’ certainly means something

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 341

attaching to the white paper itself; this ‘meaning’ therefore coincides, in
the state of fulﬁlment, with the partial percept which relates to the ‘whiteaspect’ of the object. But the assumption of a mere coincidence with this
part-percept is not enough: we are wont to say here that the white thus
apparent is known as white and is called so. In our normal talk of ‘knowledge’, we are, however, more inclined to call the object which is our (logical)
subject the thing ‘known’. In such knowledge another act plainly is present,
which perhaps includes the former one, but is nonetheless different from it:
the paper is known as white, or rather as a white thing, whenever we express
our percept in the words ‘white paper’. The intention of the word ‘white’
only partially coincides with the colour-aspect of the apparent object; a
surplus of meaning remains over, a form which ﬁnds nothing in the appearance itself to conﬁrm it. White paper is paper which is white. Is this form
not also repeated, even if it remains hidden, in the case of the noun ‘paper’?
Only the quality-meanings contained in its ‘concept’ terminate in perception. Here also the whole object is known as paper, and here also a supplementary form is known which includes being, though not as its sole form, in
itself. The fulﬁlment effected by a straight percept obviously does not extend
to such forms.
We have but to ask, further, what corresponds in perception to the difference between the two expressions ‘this white paper’ and ‘this paper is white’,
which are both realized on the same perceptual basis, we have but to ask
what side of perception is really brought out by this difference – the difference, that is, of the attributive and the predicative mode of statement – and
what, in the case of adequate adaptation, this difference brings out with
peculiar exactness, and we experience the same difﬁculty. Brieﬂy we see that
the case of structured meanings is not so simple as the case of a ‘proper’
individual meaning, with its straightforward relation of coincidence with
perception. Certainly one can tell one’s auditors, intelligibly and unambiguously that ‘I see that this paper is white’, but the thought behind such talk
need not be that the meaning of this spoken sentence expresses a mere act of
seeing. It may also be the case that the epistemic essence of our seeing, in
which the apparent object announces itself as self-given, serves to base certain connective or relational or otherwise formative acts, and that it is to
these that our expression in its changing forms is adjusted, and that it is in
such acts, performed on a basis of actual perception, that our expression, in
respect of such changing forms, ﬁnds fulﬁlment. If we now combine these
founded acts or rather act-forms with the acts which serve as their foundation, and give the comprehensive name ‘founded act’ to the whole actcomplexes that result from such formal ‘founding’, we may say: Granted the
possibility just sketched, our parallelism may be re-established, but it is
no longer a parallelism between the meaning-intentions of expressions and
the mere percepts which correspond to them: it is a parallelism between
meaning-intentions and the above mentioned perceptually founded acts.

342 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

§41 Continuation. Extension of our sphere of
examples
If we suppose our range of examples widened so as to cover the whole ﬁeld
of predicative thinking, we shall encounter similar difﬁculties and similar
possibilities of resolving them. Judgements in particular will come up which
have no deﬁnite relation to anything individual which ought to be given
through any intuition: they will give general expression to relations among
ideal unities. The general meanings embodied in such judgements can also
be realized on a basis of corresponding intuition, since they have their
origin, mediately or immediately, in intuition. The intuited individual is not,
however, what we mean here; it serves at best only as an individual case,
an example, or only as the rough analogue of an example, for the universal
which alone interests us. So, for instance, when we speak generically of
‘colour’ or speciﬁcally of ‘red’, the appearance of a single red thing may
furnish us with a documenting intuition.
It also at times happens, that one calls such a general statement an expression of intuition. We say, e.g., that an arithmetical axiom expresses what
we ﬁnd in intuition, or we raise objection to a geometrician that he merely
expresses what he sees in his ﬁgure without deducing it formally, that he
borrows from his drawing and omits steps in his proof. Such talk has its good
sense (as when the objection scores no mean hit against the formal validity
of Euclidean geometry) but ‘expression’ here means something different from
the previous cases. Even in their case expression was not a mere counterpart
of intuition: this is even less the case here, where our thought’s intention is
not aimed at intuitively given phenomena nor at their intuitive properties or
relationships, and can in our case not be aimed at them. For a ﬁgure understood geometrically is known to be an ideal limit incapable in principle of
intuitive exhibition in the concrete. Even in our case, nonetheless, and in the
generic ﬁeld as such, intuition has an essential relation to expression and to
its meaning: these, therefore, constitute an experience of general knowledge
related to intuition, no mere togetherness of them all, but a unity of felt
belongingness among them. Even in our case, concept and proposition are
oriented towards intuition, through which alone, after corresponding adjustment, self-evidence, the crown of knowledge, emerges. It requires little
reﬂection, on the other hand, to see that the meaning of the expressions in
question is not found in intuition at all, that such intuition only gives them
a ﬁlling of clarity and in the favourable case of self-evidence. We in fact
know only too well that the overwhelming majority of general statements,
and in particular those of science, behave meaningfully without any elucidation from intuition, and that only a vanishing section, even of the true and
the proven, are and remain open to complete intuitive illumination.
Even in the general realm, as in the realm of individuals, our natural talk
has a relation to intuitively founded acts of thought. Should intuition fall

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 343

wholly away, our judgement would cease to know anything. It means, in all
cases, in cogitative style, just what could be known by the aid of intuition, if
such judgement is indeed true at all. Knowledge always has the character of
a fulﬁlment and an identiﬁcation: this may be observed in every case where
we conﬁrm a general judgement through subsequent intuition, as in every
other case of knowledge.
Our difﬁculty then is how identiﬁcation can arise where the form of the
general proposition, and in particular its form of universality, would vainly
seek sympathetic elements in individual intuition. To remove this difﬁculty,
as in the previous case, the possibility of ‘founded acts’ suggests itself. This
possibility, carried out more fully, would run more or less as follows:
Where general thoughts ﬁnd fulﬁlment in intuition, certain new acts are
built on our percepts and other appearances of like order, acts related quite
differently to our appearing object from the intuitions which constitute it.
This difference in mode of relation is expressed by the perspicuous turn of
phrase employed above: that the intuited object is not here itself the thing
meant, but serves only as an elucidatory example of our true general meaning. But if expressive acts conform to these differences, their signiﬁcative
intention will not move towards what is to be intuitively presented, but
towards what is universal, what is merely documented in intuition. Where this
new intention is adequately fulﬁlled by an underlying intuition, it reveals its
own objective possibility (or the possibility or ‘reality’ of the universal).

§42 The distinction between sensuous stuff and
categorial form throughout the whole realm of
objectifying acts
After these provisional treatments have shown us our difﬁculty, and have
provided us with a thought leading to its possible removal, we shall embark
upon our actual discussion.
We started by assuming that, in the case of structured expressions, the notion of a more or less mirror-like mode of expression was quite unavailing
in describing the relation which obtains between meanings to be expressed,
on the one hand, and expressed intuitions, on the other. This is doubtless
correct and need now only be made more precise. We need only earnestly
ponder what things can be possible matter for perception, and what things
possible matter for meaning, to become aware that, in the mere form of a
judgement, only certain antecedently speciﬁable parts of our statement can
have something which corresponds to them in intuition, while to other parts of
the statement nothing intuitive possibly can correspond.
Let us consider this situation a little more closely.
Perceptual statements are, completely and normally expressed, articulate
utterances of varying pattern. We have no difﬁculty in distinguishing such
types as ‘A is P ’ (where ‘A’ serves as index for a proper name), ‘An S is P’,

344 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

‘This S is P, ‘All S are P ’ etc. Many complications arise through the modifying inﬂuence of negation, through the introduction of distinctions between
absolute and relative predicates (attributes), through conjunctive, disjunctive and determinative connectives etc. In the diversity of these types certain
sharp distinctions of meaning make themselves clear. To the various letters
(variables) and words in these types correspond sometimes members, sometimes connective forms, in the meanings of the actual statements which
belong to these types. Now it is easy to see that only at the places indicated
by letters (variables) in such ‘forms of judgement’, can meanings be put
that are themselves fulﬁlled in perception, whereas it is hopeless, even quite
misguided, to look directly in perception for what could give fulﬁlment to
our supplementary formal meanings. The letters (variables) on account of
their merely functional meaning, can doubtless take complex thoughts as
their values: statements of high complexity can be seen from the standpoint
of very simple judgement-types. The same difference between ‘matter’ and
‘form’ therefore repeats itself in what is looked upon, in uniﬁed fashion, as
a ‘term’. But eventually, in the case of each perceptual statement, and likewise, of course, in the case of every other statement that in a certain primary
sense, gives expression to intuition, we shall come down to certain ﬁnal
elements of our terms – we may call them elements of stuff – which ﬁnd
direct fulﬁlment in intuition (perception, imagination etc.), while the supplementary forms, which as forms of meaning likewise crave fulﬁlment,
can ﬁnd nothing that ever could ﬁt them in perception or acts of like order.
This fundamental difference we call, in a natural extension of its application
over the whole sphere of objectifying presentation, the categorial and absolute distinction between the form and matter of presentation, and at the same
time separate it off from the relative or functional difference which is closely
bound up with it, and which has just been subsidiarily touched on above.
We have just spoken of a natural extension of our distinction over the
whole sphere of objectifying presentation. We take the constituents of the
fulﬁlment which correspond to the material or formal constituents of our
meaning-intentions as being material or formal constituents respectively, so
making clear what is to count as ‘material’ or ‘formal’ in the general sphere
of objectifying acts.
Of matter (stuff ) and form we often talk in many other senses. We must
expressly point out that our present talk of ‘matter’, which has its contrast
in categorial form, has nothing whatever to do with the ‘matter’ which
contrasts with the quality of acts, as when, e.g., we distinguish the ‘matter’
in our meanings from their assertive or merely presentative quality, this
‘matter’ being what tells us as what, or as now determined and interpreted,
an object is meant in our meanings. To make the distinction easier, we shall
not speak of ‘matter’ in our categorial contrast, but of ‘stuff ’, while wherever ‘matter’ is meant in our previous sense, we shall talk pointedly of
‘intentional matter’ or of ‘interpretative sense’.

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 345

§43 The objective correlates of categorial forms are
not ‘real’ (realen) moments
It is now time to illuminate the distinction to which we have just given a
name. We shall link on, for this purpose, to our previous examples.
The form-giving ﬂexion Being, whether in its attributive or predicative
function, is not fulﬁlled, as we said, in any percept. We here remember
Kant’s dictum: Being is no real predicate. This dictum refers to being qua
existence, or to what Herbart called the being of ‘absolute position’, but it
can be taken to be no less applicable to predicative and attributive being.
In any case it precisely refers to what we are here trying to make clear. I can
see colour, but not being-coloured. I can feel smoothness, but not beingsmooth. I can hear a sound, but not that something is sounding. Being is
nothing in the object, no part of it, no moment tenanting it, no quality or
intensity of it, no ﬁgure of it or no internal form whatsoever, no constitutive
feature of it however conceived. But being is also nothing attaching to an
object: as it is no real (reales) internal feature, so also it is no real external
feature, and therefore not, in the real sense, a ‘feature’ at all. For it has
nothing to do with the real forms of unity which bind objects into more comprehensive objects, tones into harmonies, things into more comprehensive
things or arrangements of things (gardens, streets, the phenomenal external
world). On these real forms of unity the external features of objects, the right
and the left, the high and the low, the loud and the soft etc., are founded.
Among these anything like an ‘is’ is naturally not to be found.
We have just been speaking of objects, their constitutive features, their
factual connection with other objects, through which more comprehensive
objects are created, and also, at the same time, external features in the
partial objects. We said that something corresponding to being was not to
be sought among them. For all these are perceptible, and they exhaust the
range of possible percepts, so that we are at once saying and maintaining
that being is absolutely imperceptible.
Here, however a clarifying supplement is necessary. Perception and object
are concepts that cohere most intimately together, which mutually assign
sense to one another, and which widen or narrow this sense conjointly.
But we must emphasize that we have here made use of a certain naturally
delimited, natural, but also very narrow concept of perception (or of object).
It is well-known that one also speaks of ‘perceiving’, and in particular of
‘seeing’, in a greatly widened sense, which covers the grasping of whole
states of affairs, and even ultimately the a priori self-evidence of laws (in the
case of ‘insight’). In the narrower sense of perception (to talk roughly and
popularly) we perceive everything objective that we see with our eyes, hear
with our ears or can grasp with any ‘outer’ or even ‘inner sense’. In ordinary
speech, no doubt, only external things and connective forms of things (together with their immediate qualities) can count as ‘perceived by the senses’.

346 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

But once talk of an ‘inner sense’ had been introduced, one should in consistency have widened the notion of sense-perception suitably, so as to include
‘inner perception’, and so as to include under the name ‘sense-object’ the
correlated sphere of ‘inner objects’, the ego and its internal experiences.
In the sphere of sense-perception thus understood, and in the sphere,
likewise, of sensuous intuition in general – we adhere to our much widened
talk of the ‘sensuous’ – a meaning like that of the word ‘being’ can ﬁnd no
possible objective correlate, and so no possible fulﬁlment in the acts of such
perception. What holds of ‘being’ is plainly true of the remaining categorial
forms in our statements, whether these bind the constituents of terms together, or bind terms themselves together in the unity of the proposition.
The ‘a’ and the ‘the’, the ‘and’ and the ‘or’, the ‘if ’ and the ‘then’, the ‘all’
and the ‘none’, the ‘something’ and the ‘nothing’, the forms of quantity and
the determinations of number etc. – all these are meaningful propositional
elements, but we should look in vain for their objective correlates (if such
may be ascribed to them at all) in the sphere of real objects, which is in fact
no other than the sphere of objects of possible sense-perception.

§44 The origin of the concept of Being and of the
remaining categories does not lie in the realm of
inner perception
This holds – we stress it expressly – both of the sphere of outer sense, and of
that of ‘inner sense’. It is a natural but quite misguided doctrine, universally
put about since the time of Locke, that the meanings in question (or the
corresponding substantivally hypostatized meanings) – the logical categories such as being and non-being, unity, plurality, totality, number, ground,
consequence etc. – arise through reﬂection upon certain mental acts, and so
fall in the sphere of ‘inner sense’, of ‘inner perception’. In this manner, indeed,
concepts like Perception, Judgement, Afﬁrmation, Denial, Collecting, Counting, Presupposing and Inferring arise, which are all, therefore, ‘sensuous’
concepts, belonging, that is, to the sphere of ‘inner sense’. The previous
series of concepts do not arise in this manner, since they cannot at all be
regarded as concepts of mental acts, or of their real constituents. The thought
of a Judgement fulﬁls itself in the inner intuition of an actual judgement,
but the thought of an ‘is’ does not fulﬁl itself in this manner. Being is not
a judgement nor a constituent of a judgement. Being is as little a real constituent of some inner object as it is of some outer object, and so not of a
judgement. In a judgement, a predicative statement, ‘is’ functions as a side
of our meaning, just as perhaps, although otherwise placed and functioning,
‘gold’ and, ‘yellow’ do. The is itself does not enter into the judgement, it is
merely meant, signitively referred to, by the little word ‘is’. It is, however,
self-given, or at least putatively given, in the fulﬁlment which at times invests
the judgement, the becoming aware of the state of affairs supposed. Not only

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 347

what is meant in the partial meaning gold, nor only what is meant in the
partial meaning yellow, itself appears before us, but also gold-being-yellow
thus appears. Judgement and judgemental intuition are therefore at one in
the self-evident judgement, and pre-eminently so if the judgement is selfevident in the ideally limiting sense.
If one now understands by ‘judging’, not merely meaning-intentions connected with actual assertions, but the fulﬁlments that in the end ﬁt them
completely, it is indeed correct that being can only be apprehended through
judging, but this does not at all mean that the concept of being must be
arrived at ‘through reﬂection’ on certain judgements, or that it can ever be
arrived at in this fashion. ‘Reﬂection’ is in other respects a fairly vague
word. In epistemology it has at least the relatively ﬁxed sense that Locke
gave it, that of internal perception: we can only adhere to this sense in
interpreting a doctrine which imagines it can ﬁnd the origin of the concept
of Being through reﬂecting on judgements. The relational being expressed
in predication, e.g. through ‘is’, ‘are’ etc., lacks independence: if we round
it out to something fully concrete, we get the state of affairs in question,
the objective correlate of the complete judgement. We can then say: As the
sensible object stands to sense-perception so the state of affairs stands to the
‘becoming aware’ in which it is (more or less adequately) given – we should
like to say simply: so the state of affairs stands to the perception of it. As the
concept Sensuous Object (Real Object) cannot arise through reﬂection upon
perception, since this could only yield us the concept Perception (or a concept of certain real constituents of Perception), so the concept of State of
Affairs cannot arise out of reﬂection on judgements, since this could only
yield us concepts of judgements or of real constituents of judgements.
That percepts in the one case, and judgements ( judgemental intuitions,
percepts of states of affairs) in the other, must be experienced, in order that
each such act of abstraction should get started, goes without saying, but
to be experienced is not to he made objective. ‘Reﬂection’, however, implies
that what we reﬂect upon, the phenomenological experience, is rendered
objective to us (is inwardly perceived by us), and that the properties to be
generalized are really given in this objective content.
Not in reﬂection upon judgements, nor even upon fulﬁlments of judgements,
but in the fulﬁlments of judgements themselves lies the true source of the
concepts State of Affairs and Being (in the copulative sense). Not in these
acts as objects, but in the objects of these acts, do we have the abstractive
basis which enables us to realize the concepts in question. And naturally the
appropriate modiﬁcations of these acts yield just as good a basis.
It is in fact obvious from the start that, just as any other concept (or Idea,
Speciﬁc Unity) can only ‘arise’, i.e. become self-given to us, if based on an
act which at least sets some individual instance of it imaginatively before
our eyes, so the concept of Being can arise only when some being, actual or
imaginary, is set before our yes. If ‘being’ is taken to mean predicative being,

348 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

some state of affairs must be given to us, and this by way of an act which
gives it, an analogue of common sensuous intuition.
The like holds of all categorial forms (or of all categories). An aggregate,
e.g., is given, and can only be given, in an actual act of assembly, in an act,
that is, expressed in the conjunctive form of connection A and B and C . . . But
the concept of Aggregate does not arise through reﬂection on this act: instead of paying heed to the act which presents an aggregate, we have rather
to pay heed to what it presents, to the aggregate it renders apparent in
concreto, and then to lift the universal form of our aggregate to conceptually
universal consciousness.

§45 Widening of the concept of Intuition, and
in particular of the concepts Perception and
Imagination. Sensible and categorial intuition
If we now ask: ‘Where do the categorial forms of our meanings ﬁnd their
fulﬁlment, if not in the “perception” or “intuition which we tried provisionally to delimit in talking of “sensibility” ’, our answer is plainly preﬁgured in
the discussions just completed.
We have taken it for granted that forms, too, can be genuinely fulﬁlled, or
that the same applies to variously structured total meanings, and not merely
to the ‘material’ elements of such meanings, and our assumption is put
beyond doubt by looking at each case of faithful perceptual assertion. This
will explain also why we call the whole perceptual assertion an expression
of perception and, in a derivative sense, of whatever is intuited or itself
presented in perception. But if the ‘categorial forms’ of the expression, present
together with its material aspects, have no terminus in perception, if by
the latter we understand merely sense-perception, then talk of expressing a
percept must here rest on a different meaning: there must at least be an
act which renders identical services to the categorial elements of meaning
that merely sensuous perception renders to the material elements. The essential homogeneity of the function of fulﬁlment, as of all the ideal relationships necessarily bound up with it, obliges us to give the name ‘perception’
to each fulﬁlling act of conﬁrmatory self-presentation, to each fulﬁlling
act whatever the name of an ‘intuition’, and to its intentional correlate the
name of ‘object’. If we are asked what it means to say that categorially
structured meanings ﬁnd fulﬁlment, conﬁrm themselves in perception, we
can but reply: it means only that they relate to the object itself in its categorial
structure. The object with these categorial forms is not merely referred to, as
in the case where meanings function purely symbolically, but it is set before
our very eyes in just these forms. In other words: it is not merely thought
of, but intuited or perceived. When we wish, accordingly, to set forth what
this talk of ‘fulﬁlment’ is getting at, what structured meanings and their
structural elements express, what unitary or unifying factor corresponds to

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 349

them objectively, we unavoidably come on ‘intuition’ (or on ‘perception’
and ‘object’). We cannot manage without these words, whose widened sense
is of course evident. What shall we call the correlate of a non-sensuous
subject-presentation, one involving non-sensuous structure, if the word
‘object’ is not available to us? How shall we speak of its actual givenness,
or apparent givenness, when the word ‘perception’ is denied us? In common parlance, therefore, aggregates, indeﬁnite pluralities, totalities, numbers,
disjunctions, predicates (right-ness), states of affairs, all count as ‘objects’,
while the acts through which they seem to be given count as ‘percepts’.
Plainly the connection between the wider and narrower, the supersensuous
(i.e. raised above sense, or categorial) and sensuous concept of perception, is
no external or contingent matter, but one rooted in the whole business on
hand. It falls within the great class of acts whose peculiarity it is that in
them something appears as ‘actual’, as ‘self-given’. Plainly this appearance
of actuality and self-givenness (which may very well be delusive) is throughout characterized by its difference from essentially related acts through which
alone it achieves full clarity – its difference from an imaginative ‘making
present’, or from a merely signiﬁcative ‘thinking of ’, which both exclude
‘presence’ (so to say appearance ‘in person’), though not excluding the belief
in being. As regards the latter, imaginal or symbolic representation is possible in two manners: in an assertive manner, asserting something’s being
in imaginal or symbolic fashion, and in a non-assertive manner, as ‘mere’
imagination or thinking without taking something to be. We need not enter
more closely into the discussion of these differences after the analyses of the
previous section, which permit of a sufﬁciently general interpretation. It is
clear, in any case, that the concept of imagination must be widened in correspondence with the concept of perception. We could not speak of something
super-sensuously or categorially perceived, if we could not imagine this thing
‘in the same manner’ (i.e. not merely sensuously). We must therefore draw a
quite general distinction between sensuous and categorial intuition (or show
the possibility of such a distinction).
Our extended concept of Perception permits, further, of a narrower and
a wider interpretation. In the widest sense even universal states of affairs
can be said to be perceived (‘seen’, ‘beheld with evidence’). In the narrower
sense, perception terminates upon individual, and so upon temporal being.

§46 Phenomenological analysis of the distinction
between sensuous and categorial perception
In our next treatments we shall ﬁrst only discuss individual percepts, then
widen our treatment to take in individual intuitions of the same order.
The division between ‘sensuous’ and ‘supersensuous’ percepts was only
very superﬁcially indicated and quite roughly characterized above. Antiquated talk of external and internal senses, plainly stemming from the naïve

350 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

metaphysic and anthropology of daily life, may be useful in pointing out the
sphere to be excluded, but a true determination and circumscription of the
sensory sphere is not thereby reached, so depriving the concept of categorial
perception of its descriptive underpinning. To ascertain and clarify the said
distinction is all the more important, since such fundamental distinctions
as that between categorial form and sensuously founded matter, and the
similar distinction between categories and all other concepts, depends wholly
on it. Our concern is therefore to seek more profound descriptive characterizations, which will give us some insight into the essentially different constitution of sensuous and categorial percepts (or intuitions in general).
For our immediate purposes it is, however, unnecessary to carry out an
exhaustive analysis of the phenomena involved. That would be a task that
would require extraordinarily comprehensive treatments. Here it is sufﬁcient
to concentrate on some weightier points, which may help to mark off both
sorts of acts in their mutual relation.
It is said of every percept that it grasps its object directly, or grasps this
object itself. But this direct grasping has a different sense and character
according as we are concerned with a percept in the narrower or the wider
sense, or according as the directly grasped object is sensuous or categorial.
Or otherwise put, according as it is a real or an ideal object. Sensuous
or real objects can in fact be characterized as objects of the lowest level of
possible intuition, categorial or ideal objects as objects of higher levels.
In the sense of the narrower, ‘sensuous’ perception, an object is directly
apprehended or is itself present, if it is set up in an act of perception in a
straightforward (schlichter) manner. What this means is this: that the object
is also an immediately given object in the sense that, as this object perceived
with this deﬁnite objective content, it is not constituted in relational, connective, or otherwise articulated acts, acts founded on other acts which bring
other objects to perception. Sensuous objects are present in perception at a
single act-level: they do not need to be constituted in many-rayed fashion
in acts of higher level, whose objects are set up for them by way of other
objects, already constituted in other acts.
Each straightforward act of perception, by itself or together with other
acts, can serve as basic act for new acts which at times include it, at times
merely presuppose it, acts which in their new mode of consciousness likewise bring to maturity a new awareness of objects which essentially presupposes the old. When the new acts of conjunction, of disjunction, of deﬁnite
and indeﬁnite individual apprehension (that – something), of generalization,
of straightforward, relational and connective knowledge, arise, we do not
then have any sort of subjective experiences, nor just acts connected with the
original ones. What we have are acts which, as we said, set up new objects,
acts in which something appears as actual and self-given, which was not
given, and could not have been given, as what it now appears to be, in these
foundational acts alone. On the other hand, the new objects are based on the

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 351

older ones, they are related to what appears in the basic acts. Their manner of
appearance is essentially determined by this relation. We are here dealing
with a sphere of objects, which can only show themselves ‘in person’ in such
founded acts. In such founded acts we have the categorial element in intuition and knowledge, in them assertive thought, functioning expressively,
ﬁnds fulﬁlment; the possibility of complete accord with such acts determines
the truth, the rightness, of an assertion. So far we have of course only
considered the sphere of perception, and only its most elementary cases.
But one sees at once that the distinction of straightforward and founded
acts can be extended from percepts to all intuitions. We clearly envisage the
possibility of complex acts which in mixed fashion have a part-basis in
straightforward percepts and a part-basis in straightforward imaginations,
and the further possibility of setting up new foundations on intuitions which
themselves have foundations, and so building up whole series of foundings
upon foundings. We further see that signitive intentions have structures
patterned on such foundings whether of lower or higher order, and that
again mixtures of signitive and intuitive acts emerge out of such ‘founding’,
founded acts, in short, that are built on acts of one or the other sort. Our
ﬁrst task, however, is to deal with the elementary cases and elucidate them
completely.

§47 Continuation. Characterization of
sense-perception as ‘straightforward’ perception
We shall now scrutinize the acts in which sensuous concreta and their sensuous constituents are presented as given; as opposed to these we shall later
consider the quite different acts in which concretely determinate States of
Affairs, Collections and Disjunctions are given as complex thought-objects,
or as objects of higher order, which include their foundational objects as real
parts (reell ) in themselves. We shall then deal with acts of the type of generalizing or indeﬁnitely individual apprehension, whose objects certainly are of
higher level, but which do not include their foundational objects in themselves.
In sense-perception, the ‘external’ thing appears ‘in one blow’, as soon as
our glance falls upon it. The manner in which it makes the thing appear
present is straightforward: it requires no apparatus of founding or founded
acts. To what complex mental processes it may trace back its origin, and in
what manner, is of course irrelevant here.
We are not ignoring the obvious complexity that can be shown to exist in
the phenomenological content of the straightforward perceptual act, and
particularly in its unitary intention.
Many constitutive properties certainly pertain to the thing when it appears
with a given content, some of them themselves ‘falling under perception’,
others merely intended. But we certainly do not live through all the articulated acts of perception which would arise were we to attend to all the details

352 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

of the thing, or, more precisely, to the properties of the ‘side turned to us’,
were we to make them objects in their own right. No doubt ideas of such
supplementary properties, not given in perception, are ‘dispositionally excited’, no doubt intentions which relate to them contribute to perception,
and determine its total character. But, just as the thing does not appear
before us as the mere sum of its countless individual features, which a later
preoccupation with detail may distinguish, and as even the latter does not
dirempt the thing into such details, but takes note of them only in the ever
complete, uniﬁed thing, so the act of perception also is always a homogeneous unity, which gives the object ‘presence’ in a simple, immediate way.
The unity of perception does not therefore arise through our own synthetic
activity, as if only a form of synthesis, operating by way of founded acts,
could give unity of objective reference to part-intentions. It requires no
articulation and hence no actual linkage. The unity of perception comes into
being as a straightforward unity, as an immediate fusion of part-intentions,
without the addition of new art-intentions.
We may also be unsatisﬁed with a single glance, we may handle the thing
from all sides in a continuous perceptual series, feeling it over as it were with
our senses. But each single percept in this series is already a percept of the
thing. Whether I look at this book from above or below, from inside or
outside, I always see this book. It is always one and the same thing, and that
not merely in some purely physical sense, but in the view of our percepts
themselves. If individual properties dominate variably at each step, the thing
itself, as a perceived unity, is not in essence set up by some overreaching act,
founded upon these separate percepts.
Considering things more closely, we should not present the matter as if
the one sensible object could be presented in a founded act (in a continuously developing act of perceiving), while it merely does not need to be
presented in such an act. Closer analysis shows that even a continuous perceptual ﬂux involves a fusion of part-acts in one act, rather than a peculiar
act founded upon such part-acts.
To prove this we embark on the following discussion.
The individual percepts of our series have a continuous unity. Such continuity does not amount to the mere fact of temporal adjunction: the series
of individual acts rather has the character of a phenomenological unity, in
which the individual acts are fused. In this unity, our manifold acts are not
merely fused into a phenomenological whole, but into one act, more precisely, into one concept. In the continuous running on of individual percepts
we continuously perceive the single, selfsame object. Can we now call this
continuous percept, since it is built out of individual percepts, a percept
founded upon them? It is of course founded upon them in the sense in which
a whole is founded on its parts, not however in the sense here relevant,
according to which a founded act manifests a new act-character, grounded
in the act-characters that underlie it and unthinkable apart from these. In

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 353

the case before us perception is merely, as it were, extended: it allows parts
to be broken off from itself which can function as complete, independent
percepts. But the uniﬁcation of these percepts into a continuous percept is
not the performance of some peculiar act, through which a new consciousness
of something objective is set up. We ﬁnd, instead, that absolutely nothing
new is objectively meant in the extended act, but that the same object is
continuously meant in it, the very object that the part-percepts, taken singly,
were already meaning.
One might lay stress on this sameness, and say that our unity is plainly a
unity of identiﬁcation, that the intention of the serially arranged acts coincides continuously, and that so the unity arises. This is certainly right. But
unity of identiﬁcation is unavoidably distinct, does not say the same as the
unity of an act of identiﬁcation. An act means something, an act of identiﬁcation means identity, presents it. In our case an identiﬁcation is performed,
but no identity is meant. The object meant in the differing acts of the continuous perceptual series is indeed always the same, and the acts are one
through coincidence, but what is perceived in the series, what is rendered
objective in it, is solely the sensible object, never its identity with self. Only
when we use the perceptual series to found a novel act, only when we
articulate our individual percepts, and relate their objects to each other,
does the unity of continuity holding among these individual percepts – the
unity of fusion through their coinciding intentions – provide a point d’appui
for a consciousness of identity. Identity itself is now made objective, the
moment of coincidence linking our act-characters with one another, serves
as representative content for a new percept, founded upon our articulated
individual percepts. This brings to intentional awareness that what we now
see and what we saw before are one and the same. Naturally we have then
to do with a regular act of our second group. Our act of identiﬁcation is in
sober fact a new awareness of objectivity, which causes a new ‘object’ to
appear to us, an object that can only be apprehended or given in its very
selfhood in a founded act of this sort.
Before we penetrate further into our new class of acts and objects, we
must, however, ﬁrst round off our treatment of straightforward percepts.
If we may presume to have cleared up the sense of the concept of a straightforward percept, or, what we take for the same, of sense-perception, then
we have also cleared up the concept of a sensible or real object (in the most
basic sense of ‘real’). We deﬁne a real object as the possible object of a
straightforward percept. There is a necessary parallelism between perception
and imagination, which guarantees that a possible imagination (or more
precisely a whole series of imaginations) having the same essence, corresponds to each possible percept, a straightforward imagination is correlated
with each straightforward percept, thereby giving certainty to the wider
concept of sensible intuition. We can then deﬁne sensible objects as the possible objects of sensible imagination and sensible intuition in general: this of

354 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

course involves no essential generalization of our previous deﬁnition. The
parallelism just stressed makes both deﬁnitions equivalent.
Through the concept of a real object, the concept of a real part, or more
particularly, the concepts of a real piece, and a real moment (real feature),
and a real form, are determined. Each part of a real object is a real part.
In straightforward perception we say that the whole object is explicitly
given, while each of its parts (in the widest sense of ‘parts’) is implicitly
given. The sum total of objects that can be explicitly or implicitly given in
straightforward percepts constitutes the most widely conceived sphere of sensible objects.
Each concrete sensible object is perceptible in explicit fashion, and so also
every piece of such an object. How does the matter stand in regard to
abstract moments? Their nature makes them incapable of separate being:
their representative content, even where there is merely representation by
way of analogy, cannot be experienced alone, but only in a more comprehensive concrete setting. But this does not mean that their intuition need be
a founded act. It would be one, if the apprehension of an abstract moment
was necessarily preceded by the apprehension of the concrete whole or of its
complementary moments, such an apprehension being an act of intuitive
turning towards its object. This I do not ﬁnd obvious. It is clear, per contra,
that the apprehension of a moment and of a part generally as a part of the
whole in question and, in particular, the apprehension of a sensuous feature
as a feature, or of a sensuous form as a form, point to acts which are all
founded: these acts are in our case of a relational kind. This means that the
sphere of ‘sensibility’ has been left and that of ‘understanding’ entered. We
shall now subject the just mentioned group of founded acts to a closer
consideration.

§48 Characterization of categorial acts as
founded acts
A sensible object can be apprehended by us in a variety of ways. It can, ﬁrst
of all, of course, be apprehended in ‘straightforward’ fashion. It is this
possibility, which like all the other possibilities here in question must be
throughout interpreted as ‘ideal’, which characterizes the sensible object as
a sensible object. Understood in this manner, it stands as it were simply
before us: the parts which constitute it are indeed in it, but are not made our
explicit objects in the straightforward act. The same object can, however, be
grasped by us in explicating fashion: acts of articulation can put its parts
‘into relief ’, relational acts bring the relieved parts into relation, whether to
one another or to the whole. Only through such new modes of interpretation will the connected and related members assume the character of ‘parts’
(or of ‘wholes’). The articulating acts and, taken in retrospect, the act
we call ‘straightforward’, are not merely experienced one after the other:

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 355

overreaching unities of act are rather always present, in which, as new objects,
the relationships of the parts become constituted.
Let us ﬁrst look at the relationships of parts and wholes: limiting ourselves to the simplest cases, let us consider the relationships A is or has a
and a is in A. To point to the founded acts in which these typical states
of affairs become constituted as data, and to clear up the just employed
forms of categorical statement (to lead them back to their intuitive origin
and adequate fulﬁlment) are one and the same. We are not, however, here
concerned with the qualities of acts, but only with the constitution of their
interpretative forms: to that extent our analysis, if regarded as an analysis of
judgement, will be defective.
An act of perception grasps A as a whole, at one ‘blow’ and in straightforward fashion. A second act of perception is trained upon a, the part or
dependent moment, that belongs constitutively to A. These two acts are not
merely performed together, or after one another, in the manner of disjoined
experiences; rather are they bound together in a single act in whose synthesis
A is ﬁrst given as containing a in itself. Just so, a can, with a reversal of the
direction of relational perception, achieve self-givenness as pertaining to A.
Let us now try to penetrate a little deeper.
The total intuitive reference to our object implicitly contains an intention
to a. For perception purports to grasp the object itself: its ‘grasping’ must
therefore reach to all its constituents in and with the whole object. (Naturally we are here only concerned with what constitutes the object as it appears
in perception, and as what it appears in perception, and not with such constituents as may pertain to it in ‘objective reality’, and which only later
experience, knowledge and science will bring out.)
In the narrowing down of our total percept to one speciﬁc percept, the
part-intention to a will not be torn out of the total appearance of A, so as to
break up the latter’s unity, but an independent act will have a as its own
perceptual object. At the same time one’s continuously operative total percept will coincide with this speciﬁc percept in respect of one implicit partintention. The ‘content’ which represents a, will be functioning as the same
content in a twofold fashion and, in so far as it does this, it will effect a
coincidence, a peculiar unity of the two representative functions; we shall, in
other words, have two coincident interpretations, both sustained by the
representative content in question. But this unity of these two representative
functions will now itself take on a representative role. It will not itself count
in its own right as an experienced bond among acts: it will not set itself up
as our object, but will help to set up another object. It will act representatively, and to such effect, that A will now appear to contain a in itself (or,
with a reversed direction, a will appear as contained in A).
According, therefore, to our ‘interpretative standpoint’, or to the ‘sense
of our passage’ from part to whole or contrariwise – which are both novel
phenomenological characters making their contribution to the total intentional

356 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

matter of the relating act – there will be two possibilities, marked off in a
priori fashion, in which the ‘same relation’ can achieve actual givenness. To
these correspond two a priori possibilities of relation, objectively different,
yet tied together by an ideal law, possibilities which can only be directly
constituted in founded acts of the sort in question, which can achieve ‘selfgivenness to perception’ only in acts built up in this manner.
Our exposition obviously applies to all speciﬁc forms of the relation between a whole and its parts. All such relationships are of categorial, ideal
nature. It would be a mistake to try to locate them in the straightforwardly
given whole, to discover them in this whole by analysis. The part certainly
lies hidden in the whole before all division into members, and is subsidiarily
apprehended in our perceptual grasp of this whole. But this fact, that it thus
lies hidden in the whole, is at ﬁrst merely the ideal possibility of bringing the
part, and the fact that it is a part, to perception in correspondingly articulated and founded acts.
The matter is plainly similar in the case of external relations, from which
predications such as ‘A is to the right of B’, ‘A is larger, brighter, louder
than B etc.’, take their rise. Wherever sensible objects – directly and independently perceptible – are brought together, despite their mutual exclusion,
into more or less intimate unities, into what fundamentally are more comprehensive objects, then a possibility of such external relations arises. They
all fall under the general type of the relation of part to parts within a whole.
Founded acts are once more the media in which the primary appearance of the
states of affairs in question, of such external relationships, is achieved. It is
clear, in fact, that neither the straightforward percept of the complex whole,
nor the speciﬁc percepts pertaining to its members, are in themselves the
relational percepts which alone are possible in such a complex. Only when
one member is picked out as principal member, and is dwelt on while the
other members are still kept in mind, does a determination of members by
members make its appearance, a determination which varies with the kind
of unity that is present and plainly also with the particular members set in
relief. In such cases also the choice of a principal member, or of a direction
of relational apprehension, leads to phenomenologically distinct forms of
relationship, correlatively characterized, which forms are not genuinely
present in the unarticulated percept of the connection as a straightforward
phenomenon, but which are in it only as ideal possibilities, the possibilities,
that is, of fulﬁlling relevant founded acts.
A real (reelle) location of these relations of parts in the whole would be a
confusion of distinct things: of sensuous or real (realen) forms of combination, with categorial or ideal ones. Sensible combinations are aspects of the
real (realen) object, its actual moments, present in it, if only implicitly, and
capable of being ‘lifted out of it’ by an abstractive percept. As against this,
forms of categorial combination go with the manner in which acts are synthesized: they are constituted as objects in the synthetic acts built upon our

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 357

sensibility. In the formation of external relations sensuous forms may serve
as foundations for the categorial forms which correspond to them, as when,
in the face of the sensuously intuited contact of the contents A and B within
a comprehensive whole W, we, observe, and perhaps verbally express our
observation, in the synthetic forms ‘A is in contact with B’, or ‘B is in
contact with A’. But, in constituting the latter forms, we bring new objects
into being, objects belonging to the class of ‘states of affairs’, which includes
none but ‘objects of higher order’. In the sensible whole, the parts A and B
are made one by the sensuously combinatory form of contact. The abstraction of these parts and moments, the formation of intuitions of A, B and
contact, will not yet yield the presentation A in contact with B. This demands
a novel act which, taking charge of such presentations, shapes and combines
them suitably.

§52 Universal objects constituting themselves in
universal intuitions
The simple synthetic acts with which we have so far concerned ourselves
were so founded upon straightforward percepts that the synthetic intention
was subsidiarily directed to the objects of these founding percepts, inasmuch
as it held them together in ideal ‘contents’ or brought them to a relational
unity. This is a universal character of synthetic acts as such. We now turn to
examples from another set of categorial acts, in which the objects of the
founding acts do not enter into the intention of the founded one, and would
only reveal their close relation to it in relational acts. Here we have the ﬁeld
of the universal intuition – an expression which no doubt will not seem better
to many than ‘wooden iron’.
Abstraction gets to work on a basis of primary intuitions, and with it a
new categorial act-character emerges, in which a new style of objectivity
becomes apparent, an objectivity which can only become apparent – whether
given as ‘real’ or as ‘merely imagined’ – in just such a founded act. Naturally
I do not here mean ‘abstraction’ merely in the sense of a setting-in-relief of
some non-independent moment in a sensible object, but Ideational Abstraction, where no such non-independent moment, but its Idea, its Universal, is
brought to consciousness, and achieves actual givenness. We must presuppose such an act in order that the Very Sort, to which the manifold single
moments ‘of one and the same sort’ stand opposed, may itself come before
us, and may come before us as one and the same. For we become aware of
the identity of the universal through the repeated performance of such acts
upon a basis of several individual intuitions, and we plainly do so in an
overreaching act of identiﬁcation which brings all such single acts of abstraction into one synthesis. Through such acts of abstraction, woven into new
act-forms, there arise, further, acts of universal determination, acts, that is,

358 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

which determine objects generally as subsumed under certain species A, or
acts in which unspeciﬁed objects of a sort A become present to us.
In an act of abstraction, which need not necessarily involve the use of an
abstract name, the universal itself is given to us; we do not think of it merely
in signiﬁcative fashion as when we merely understand general names, but we
apprehend it, behold it. Talk of an intuition and, more precisely, of a perception of the universal is in this case, therefore, well-justiﬁed.
Difﬁculties arise, however, from another quarter. Talk of ‘perception’
presupposes the possibility of correspondent imagination: a distinction between them, we held, is part of the natural sense of our ordinary talk about
‘intuition’. But it is just this distinction that we cannot here draw. This
seems to stem from the fact that abstractive acts do not differ in consonance
with the character of the straightforward intuitions which underlie them;
they are quite unaffected by the assertive or non-assertive character of such
underlying acts, or by their perceptual or imaginative character. The Red,
the Triangle exempliﬁed in mere phantasy is speciﬁcally the same as the Red,
the Triangle exempliﬁed in our percepts. Our consciousness of the universal
has as satisfactory a basis in perception as it has in parallel imagination, and,
wherever it arises, the Idea Red, the Idea Triangle, is itself apprehended, is
intuited in the one unique way which permits no distinction between image
and original.
We must, however, note that the examples adduced were all cases of the
adequate perception of the universal. The universal was here truly grasped
and given on the basis of truly correspondent instances. Where this is the
case, there seems in fact to be no parallel imagination having the same
intuitive content, and this is so in every case of adequate perception. For
how, we may ask, even in the realm of individuals, could a content pattern
itself on itself, since, taken as itself, it cannot also be meant as its own
analogon? And how can the note of assertion be wanting, where the meant
content is the one experienced and given? It is quite different in, e.g., the
case where mathematical analysis has given us an indirectly conceived Idea
of a certain class of curves of the third order, though we have never seen any
curve of this sort. In such a case an intuitive ﬁgure, e.g. of a familiar thirdorder curve, perhaps actually drawn, perhaps merely pictured, may very
well serve as an intuitive image, an analogon, of the universal we are intending: our consciousness of the universal is here intuitive, but analogically
intuitive, in its use of an individual intuition. And does not an ordinary
rough drawing function analogically in comparison with an ideal ﬁgure,
thereby helping to condition the imaginative character of the universal presentation? This is how we contemplate the Idea of a steam-engine, basing
ourselves on a model of a steam-engine, in which case there can naturally
be no talk of an adequate abstraction or conception. In such cases we are
not concerned with signiﬁcations, but with universal representations by way
of analogy, with universal imaginations, in short. If, however, the con-

Sensuous and categorial intuitions 359

sciousness of mere analogy lapses, as may happen, e.g., in the intuition of a
model, we have a case of the perception of the universal, even if it is one of
inadequate perception.
In the same way we may now discover the previously missing differences
between an assertive, and a merely contemplative, consciousness of the universal. Where we contemplate a universal object in a merely analogizing, imaginative fashion, we may also mean it assertively, and this act, like any assertive
reference, may be conﬁrmed or refuted by adequate future perception. The
former happens wherever the universal meaning is fulﬁlled by an adequate
percept, i.e. by a new consciousness of the universal which constitutes itself
on the basis of a ‘true’ abstraction from the corresponding individual percept. The universal object is then not merely presented and posited, but is
itself given to us. Again we can have an analogizing presentation of the
universal, without actually positing it. We conceive it, but leave it in suspense. The intention to the universal which here rests on an intuitive basis
makes no decision regarding ‘being’ or ‘non-being’, only one regarding the
possibility or impossibility of the universal, and of its presentation through
adequate abstraction.

360 Elements
Chapter
7 of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

A study in categorial
representation

§53 Backward reference to the researches of our
ﬁrst section
The founded acts analysed by us in select examples were considered by us
to be intuitions, and intuitions of the new types of object that they brought
to light, objects which can only be given in founded acts of a sort and form
which corresponds to each of them. The explanatory value of this extended
use of the concept Intuition can only lie in the fact that we are not here
dealing with some inessential, merely disjunctive widening of a concept,
which permits us to extend the sphere of that concept over the spheres of
any heterogeneous concepts whatsoever,1 but with an authentic generalization, which rests on a community of essential features. We call the new acts
‘intuitions’ in that, with a mere surrender of a ‘straightforward’ relation to
their object – the peculiar sort of immediacy deﬁned by us as ‘straightforwardness’ – they yet have all the essential peculiarities of intuitions: we ﬁnd
in their case the same essential divisions, and they show themselves capable
of achieving the same fully performed fulﬁlments. This last mentioned capacity is particularly important for our purposes, for it was with a view to such
performances that this whole investigation has been conducted. Knowledge
as the unity of fulﬁlment is not achieved on a mere basis of straightforward
acts, but in general, on a basis of categorial acts: when, accordingly, we
oppose intuition to thought (as meaning), we cannot mean by ‘intuition’ merely
sensuous intuition.
The conception of categorial acts as intuitions, ﬁrst brings true perspicuity into the relation of thought to intuition – a relation that no previous
critique of knowledge has made tolerably clear: it is the ﬁrst to render
knowledge itself intelligible, in its essence and its achievement. Through
such a conceptual extension the theses of our ﬁrst section ﬁrst gain adequate
conﬁrmation. To all intuitions, in our present widest sense, however near
or far they may stand from sensibility, expressive meanings correspond – as
their possible ideal counterparts. The divisions drawn by us within ‘epistemic
essence’, and the concepts framed in close connection therewith, retain their

A study in categorial representation 361

validity in this wider sphere, though marked off by us in relation to a narrower one.
Each categorial act of intuition has therefore:
1. its quality;
2. its (intentional) material, or interpretative sense;
3. its representing contents.
These distinctions do not reduce to distinctions among founding acts. The
quality of a total act may differ from that of a basic act, just as basic acts,
when many, may be differently qualiﬁed, as, e.g., in an idea of a relation
between a ﬁctitious object and one taken to be real.
Not only has each of the founding acts its own material, but the founded
act imports its own material: it is true to say that this novel material, or,
where this includes the materials of basic acts, the newly added part of it, is
founded on the materials of the basic act.
Finally, also, the new act has representing contents in regard to which
there are serious difﬁculties. Must new representing contents be assumed for
this new material, and what can these be?

362 Elements
Chapter
8 of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

The a priori laws of authentic and
inauthentic thinking

§59 The complication into ever new forms.
The pure theory of the forms of possible
intuitions
The varied forms of founded acts where, instead of straightforward,
sensuously-intuitive objects, categorially formed and synthetically connected
objects are constituted, permit manifold complications into new forms: in
consequence of certain a priori categorial laws, categorial unities may again
and again become the objects of new connecting, relating or ideating acts.
Universal objects, e.g., can be collectively connected, the collections thus
formed can in their turn be collectively connected with other collections of
similar or different type, and so on in inﬁnitum. The possibility of unlimited
complication is here self-evident and a priori. Just so, within certain lawbound limits, one can unify states of affairs in new states of affairs, pursue
an indeﬁnitely extended search for internal and external relations among all
such possible unities, use the results of such discovery as terms for novel
relations etc. Obviously such complication is achieved in founded acts of
ever higher level. The governing legality in this ﬁeld is the intuitive counterpart of the grammatical legality of pure logic. In this case, also, we are not
concerned with laws which seek to assess the real being of the objects presented at different levels. These laws at all events say nothing directly about
the ideal conditions of possibilities of adequate fulﬁlment. To the pure theory
of the forms of meanings we here have a corresponding pure theory of the
forms of intuitions, in which the possibility of the primitive types of simple
and complex intuitions must be established by intuitive generalization, and
the laws of their successive complication into ever new and more complex
intuitions must be laid down. To the extent that adequate intuition itself
represents a type of intuition, the pure theory of intuitive forms embraces all
the laws which concern the forms of adequate intuition: these have a peculiar
relevance to the laws of the adequate fulﬁlment of signiﬁcative intentions, or
of intentions already intuitive.

The a priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking 363

§60 The relative or functional difference between
matter and form. Pure acts of understanding, and
those mixed with sense. Sensuous concepts and
categories
The relative, merely functional difference of matter and form hangs together
with the possibility of making categorial intuitions the foundations for new
categorial intuitions, and thereupon of expressing them in corresponding
expressions and meanings. This difference was indicated above in passing
(§42). In an absolute sense, a founding sensibility provides the matter for
all acts of categorial form which are built upon it. In a relative sense, the
objects of founding acts furnish this matter, relatively, that is, to the newly
emergent forms of the founded acts. If we relate two objects already categorial, e.g. two states of affairs, these states of affairs are our matter relatively
to the relation which brings them together. To this deﬁnite use of the concepts of matter and form the traditional distinction between the matter and
form of statements corresponds exactly. The terms of a statement express the
founding acts of the whole ‘relational presentation’, or, what is the same,
they are names for its founding objects, and therefore represent the place in
which alone contributions of sense may be sought. But founding objects
may themselves be categorial in type. Plainly fulﬁlment is carried out in a
chain of acts which take us down a whole ladder of ‘foundations’. Indirect
presentations here play an essential part, whose exact investigation is an
important task in a clariﬁcation of the complex forms of cognitive thought.
Acts of straightforward intuitions we called ‘sensuous’; founded acts,
whether leading back immediately or mediately to sense, we called ‘categorial’.
But it is worth our while to draw a distinction, within the sphere of categorial
acts, between those acts that are purely categorial, acts of ‘pure understanding’, and mixed acts of understanding that are blended with sense. It lies in the
nature of the case that everything categorial ultimately rests upon sensuous
intuition, that a ‘categorial intuition’, an intellectual insight, a case of thought
in the highest sense, without any foundation of sense, is a piece of nonsense.
The idea of a pure intellect, interpreted as a faculty of pure thinking
(= categorial action), quite cut off from a ‘faculty of sensibility’, could only
be conceived before there had been an elementary analysis of knowledge
in the irrefragable evidence of its being. Nonetheless, the distinctions just
indicated, and with them the concept of a purely categorial act and, if one
likes, the further concept of a pure understanding, all have a good sense. If
we ponder on the peculiarity of eidetic abstraction, that it necessarily rests
on individual intuition, but does not for that reason mean what is individual
in such intuition, if we pay heed to the fact that it is really a new way of
conceiving, constitutive of generality instead of individuality – then the possibility of universal intuitions arises, intuitions which not merely exclude all
individuality, but also all sensibility from their intentional purview. In other

364 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

words, we distinguish between sensuous abstraction, which yields sensuous
concepts – purely sensuous or mixed with categorial forms – and purely
categorial abstraction, which yields purely categorial concepts. Colour, house,
judgement, wish are purely sensuous concepts; colouredness, virtue, the axiom
of parallels etc., have a categorial admixture, while unity, plurality, relation,
concept are purely categorial. Where we speak absolutely of categorial concepts, purely categorial ones are always meant. Sensuous concepts ﬁnd their
immediate basis in the data of sensuous intuition, categorial concepts in the
data of categorial intuition, purely with regard to the categorial form of
the whole categorially formed object. If, e.g., the intuition of a relation
underlies an abstraction, the abstractive consciousness may direct itself to
the relational form in specie, so that everything sensuous in what underlies
the relation is discounted. So arise categories, which rubric, understood
pointedly, merely covers the primitive concepts in our present context.
We have just identiﬁed concept and Species: this was implicit in the whole
sense of our completed discussion. But, if one understands by ‘concepts’
universal presentations instead of universal objects, whether these be universal
intuitions or the universal meanings which correspond to them, our distinction carries over simply to these. It carries over similarly to presentations of
the form an A, having regard to the fact that the Species A may include or
exclude what is sensible. All logical forms and formulae such as All S are P,
No S is P etc., are purely categorial. Here the letters ‘S’, ‘P’ etc., merely
point indirectly to ‘certain’, indeﬁnite concepts, variable ‘at will’; in the total
formula a complex thought, made up of purely categorial elements, corresponds to them. Like all pure logic, so all pure arithmetic, the pure theory of
manifolds, pure mathematics, in short, in the widest sense, are pure in the
sense that they contain no sensuous concept in their whole theoretical fabric.

§61 Categorial forming involves no real reshaping of
the object
Our talk of categorial form, as has been clear from our last set of discussions, is naturally and harmlessly ambiguous, since we have drawn a thoroughgoing distinction between act and object. We mean by categorial form,
on the one hand, the characters of founded acts, which give form to acts of
straightforward or of already founded intuition, and transform them into
new presentations of objects. These latter presentations, as opposed to the
acts on which they are founded, set up for us a peculiarly modiﬁed objectivity: the original objects are now seen in certain interpretative and connective
forms which are our categorial forms in the second, objective sense. The
conjunctive connection A and B, which as a uniﬁed act means a categorial
unity of objects (the aggregate of them both), will serve as an example.
The expression ‘A and B’ illustrates, particularly in relation to the meaning
of ‘and’, a further sense of our talk of categorial form, according to which

The a priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking 365

signiﬁcative forms, forms which ﬁnd possible fulﬁlment in founded types of
act, are called categorial forms, or, more cautiously, categorial forms in a
loose sense of the word.
This being premised, we now wish to bring to explicit clearness, for the
sake of its importance, a proposition that we have already enunciated
and which is really obvious in the light of our whole exposition. This is the
proposition that categorial functions, in ‘forming’ sensible objects, leave
their real essence untouched. The object is intellectually grasped by the
intelligence, and especially by ‘knowledge’ (itself a categorial function), but
it is not thereby falsiﬁed. To clarify this, let us remember the difference
mentioned in passing between categorial unities in the objective sense, and
real unities such as the unity of the parts of a thing, or of trees in an avenue
etc. The unity of the real elements in a mental experience, or the unity of
all experiences which coexist in a single individual consciousness, likewise
count among such real unities. All such unities, treated as wholes, resemble
their parts in being objects in the straightforward, primary sense: they can
be intuited in possible straightforward intuitions. They are not merely
categorially uniﬁed, constituted through a being-considered-together, through
collection, disjunction, relation etc. They are intrinsically uniﬁed: they have
a form of union, perceivable in the whole as a real property, a real moment
of unity, and perceivable in the same sense in which any of their connected
members and their intrinsic properties are perceivable.
It is quite different in the case of categorial forms. The new objects they
create are not objects in the primary, original sense. Categorial forms do not
glue, tie or put parts together, so that a real, sensuously perceivable whole
emerges. They do not form in the sense in which the potter forms. Otherwise
the original datum of sense-perception would be modiﬁed in its own objectivity: relational and connective thought and knowledge would not be of what
is, but would be a falsifying transformation into something else. Categorial
forms leave primary objects untouched: they can do nothing to them, cannot
change them in their own being, since the result would otherwise be a new
object in the primary, real sense. Evidently the outcome of a categorial act,
e.g. one of collection or relation, consists in an objective ‘view’ (Fassung) of
what is primarily intuited, a ‘view’ that can only be given in such a founded
act, so that the thought of a straightforward percept of the founded object,
or of its presentation through some other straightforward intuition, is a
piece of nonsense.

§62 Our freedom in the categorial forming of given
material and its limits. Purely categorial laws
(laws of ‘authentic’ thinking)
Real, sensuous forms of unity, whether external or internal, are determined
by a law governing the essential nature of the parts to be connected; if the

366 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

individuation of these parts is taken in its full extent, they are absolutely
determined. All unity points to governing legality, as real unity points to
real governing legality. What is really one, must also really be made one.
Where we speak of our freedom to unite or not to unite, we are not speaking
of contents in their full reality, which includes their spatio-temporal properties. While in this ﬁeld the consciousness, and especially the direct intuition,
of real contents, is eo ipso the consciousness of their real connections and
forms, the position is quite different in regard to categorial forms. With real
contents none of the categorial forms which ﬁt them is necessarily given:
there is abundant freedom to connect and relate, to generalize and subsume
etc. There are many arbitrary ways to divide up a sensuously uniﬁed group
into part-groups: we may at will arrange these diversely divisible part-groups,
and effect same-level connections among them, we can also build collections
of the second, third . . . order upon one another. Many possibilities of categorial shaping therefore arise on the foundation of the same sensuous stuff.
Just so, we can compare any item from one and the same sense-complex with
any other of its members, or distinguish it from them. We can make either
of them the subject-term, or, by arbitrary conversion, the object-term of
some relation in question. We can put these relations into relation with one
another, connect them collectively, classify them etc.
Great, however, as this freedom of categorial union and formation may
be, it still has its law-governed limits. The very fact that categorial forms
constitute themselves in founded characters of acts, and in these alone,
involves a certain necessity of connection. For how else could we speak of
categorial perception and intuition, if any conceivable matter could be put
into any conceivable form, and the underlying straightforward intuitions
therefore permitted themselves to be arbitrarily combined with categorial
characters? Where, e.g., we carry out a whole-part relationship intuitively,
we can normally convert it, but not in such a manner that the part, with
unchanged real content, can be looked on as the whole, and the whole as the
part. It is also not open to us to treat this relation as one of total identity
or of total exclusion etc. We can no doubt ‘think’ any relation between any
set of terms, and any form whatever on the basis of any matter – think them,
that is, in the sense of merely meaning them. But we cannot really carry out
‘foundings’ on every foundation: we cannot see sensuous stuff in any
categorial form we like, let alone perceive it thus, and above all not perceive
it adequately.
In framing our widened concept of perception, we found, eo ipso, a
certain tied character in it. This does not mean that the character of perception is really (reell ) bound up with sensuous content. This is never the case,
for this would mean that nothing existed unperceived, or could exist
unperceived. Certainly, however, nothing exists that cannot be perceived.
This means that the actual performance of actual acts on the ground of just
these straightforward intuitions is in the ideal sense possible. And these

The a priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking 367

possibilities, like ideal possibilities in general, are limited by law to the
extent that certain impossibilities, ideal incompatibilities, are by law ranged
alongside of them.
The ideal laws governing the connection of such possibilities and impossibilities, belong among categorial forms in specie, i.e. among categories in
the objective sense of the word. They determine what variations in any given
categorial forms there can be in relation to the same deﬁnite, but arbitrarily
chosen, matter. They circumscribe the ideally closed manifold of the rearrangements and transformations of categorial forms on the basis of constant,
selfsame matter. This matter is here only relevant in so far as it must be kept
intentionally identical. But, to the extent that the species of this matter are
quite freely variable, and are only subject to the obvious ideal condition of
capacity to sustain the forementioned forms, the laws in question are of an
entirely pure and analytic character, and quite independent of the particularity
of their matter. Their general expression, therefore, contains no reference to
material species, but makes exclusive use of algebraical symbols as bearers
of indeterminately general presentations of certain matters, variable in all
but the identity they must keep with themselves.
To gain insight into these laws, does not therefore require an actual carrying out of a categorial intuition, which makes its matters truly intuitive:
any categorial intuition sufﬁces, which puts the possibility of the categorial
formation in question before one’s eyes. In the generalizing abstraction of
this comprehensive possibility the unitary, intuitive ‘insight’ into the law is
achieved: this insight has, in the sense used in our doctrine, the character of
an adequate general percept. The general object, which is itself present in it,
is the categorial law. We may assert: The ideal conditions of categorial intuition in general are, correlatively regarded, the conditions of the possibility of
the objects of categorial intuition, and of the possibility of categorial objects
simpliciter. That an object thus and thus categorially formed is possible, is
essentially related to the fact that a categorial intuition – a mere imagination
– can set such an object completely before one’s eyes, to the fact, in other
words, that the requisite categorial syntheses and other categorial acts can be
really performed on the basis of the founding intuitions concerned (even if the
latter are imaginary).
What categorial formations are in fact permitted by given materials of
perception or imagination, what categorial acts can be really carried out on
the basis of their constitutive sensuous intuitions: on this point our analytic
laws, which are here our ideal conditions, say nothing. That boundless
arbitrariness does not here obtain, that ‘actual’ performability has not here
the character of empirical actuality, but of ideal possibility, is shown by
our above examples. These also make plain that it is the particularity of
the matter which, from case to case, circumscribes possibility, so that
we can, e.g., say that W is really a whole as regards w, or that g is really a
property of G etc. In such cases, of course, the categorial form (unlike its

368 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

real counterpart) is not limited to the kinds of content covered by W, w, G,
g, so as to have no bearing on contents of other kinds. Contrariwise it is
evident that contents of all kinds can be formed by all categories. For categorial
forms are not founded on material contents, as we have already explained
above (cf. §57 excised from this edition). These pure laws can therefore not
prescribe what forms a given matter can assume, but can only tell us that,
when it, and any matter in general, assumes a certain form, or is capable of
assuming it, a deﬁnitely limited circle of further forms remains open to the
same matter. There is, i.e., an ideally closed circle of possible transformation
of a functioning form, into ever new forms. The ideal possibility of these new
forms in relation to the same matter, has its a priori guarantee in the before
mentioned analytic laws which embody the presuppositions in question.
These are the pure laws of authentic thinking, the laws, that is, of categorial
intuitions in virtue of their purely categorial forms. For categorial intuitions
function in the thought of theory as actual or possible fulﬁlments (or frustrations) of meanings, and impart to statements (according to their mode
of functioning) the logical values of truth and falsehood. On the laws here
considered the normative regulation of purely signitive, or admixedly signitive,
thought depends.
To expound this matter more precisely, and to clear up the special sense
implied in talk of the laws of authentic thinking, we must take a closer look
into the sphere of meanings and of meaning-fulﬁlments.

§63 The new laws of the validity of signitive
and admixedly signitive acts (laws of inauthentic
thinking)
In our discussions up to this point we have thought of categorial acts as free
from all signiﬁcative side-structures, as carried out, but not as founding acts
of knowing or naming. Every unprejudiced analyst will concede that we can,
e.g., intuit aggregates, or many primitive states of affairs, without expressing them nominally or propositionally. We now oppose the case of mere
signiﬁcation to the case of mere intuition: we note that to all acts of categorial
intuition, with their categorially formed objects, purely signiﬁcative acts
may correspond. This is an obvious a priori possibility. There is no act-form
relevant here, to which there is not a corresponding possible form of meaning, and each meaning can be thought of as carried out without a correlated
intuition. The ideal of a logically adequate language is that of a language
which can give unambiguous expression to all possible matters and all possible
categorial forms. To its words certain signiﬁcative intentions unambiguously pertain, which can come alive even in the absence of ‘corresponding’,
i.e. of fulﬁlling, intuition. There is therefore, running parallel to all possible
primary and founded intuitions, a system of primary and founded meanings
which could possibly express them.

The a priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking 369

The realm of meaning is, however, much wider than that of intuition, i.e.
than the total realm of possible fulﬁlment. For, on the meaning-side, an
endless host of complex meanings arises, which lack ‘reality’ or ‘possibility’.
They are patterns of meanings assembled together into unitary meanings, to
which, however, no possible unitary correlate of fulﬁlment can correspond.
For this reason there is no complete parallelism between categorial types,
i.e. types of categorial intuition, and types of meaning. To each categorial
type of lower or higher level a meaning-type corresponds, but to every type
formed by free signiﬁcative welding to complex types, there is not a corresponding type of categorial objectivity. We recall types of analytic contradiction such as ‘an A which is not an A’, ‘All A’s are B’s and some A’s are
not B’s’ etc. Only in connection with primitive types can and must such
parallelism obtain, since all primitive meanings ‘originate’ in the fulness of
correlated intuition, or, to put the matter more plainly, since talk of compatibility and incompatibility applies only in the sphere of what is put
together, or is to be put together, simple meanings, as expressions of what
is simple, can never be ‘imaginary’. This applies also to every simple form
of meaning. While ‘Something that is at once A and not-A’ is impossible, ‘an
A and a B’ is possible, since the and-form, being simple, has a ‘real’ sense.
If we transfer the term ‘categorial’ to the realm of meaning, a peculiar
signiﬁcative form (and a peculiar meaning-form in specie) will correspond to
each authentic categorial form, whether to one authentic in the objective
sense, or to the corresponding categorial form of intuition (in which what
is categorially objective is perceptually or imaginatively constituted). In this
form of signiﬁcation we achieve signiﬁcative reference to a collection or a
disjunction, an identity or a non-identity etc. Whenever one opposes presentation in the authentic, to presentation in an inauthentic sense, one normally
has the intuitive-signiﬁcative antithesis in mind (though occasionally, no
doubt, one is thinking of the other antithesis of adequate-inadequate). Our
present cases would accordingly be cases of collection, disjunction, identiﬁcation, abstraction etc., in an inauthentic sense.
If one includes under the rubric of ‘acts of thinking’, all the categorial acts
through which judgements, as predicative signiﬁcations, gain fulness and
their whole value for knowledge, we must distinguish between authentic acts
of thinking and inauthentic ones. The inauthentic acts of thinking would be
the signiﬁcant intentions behind statements and, by a natural extension,
all signiﬁcative acts which could possibly function as parts of such predicative intentions: all signiﬁcative acts can plainly function in this fashion. The
authentic acts of thinking would lie in the corresponding fulﬁlments, i.e. the
intuitions of states of affairs, and all intuitions which function as possible
parts of such intuitions. All intuitions can function in this manner: there is,
in particular, no categorial form that could not be a constituent of the form
of a state of affairs. The general doctrine of the form of symbolic judgements
(the meanings of statements) includes that of the forms of meaning in general

370 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

(the pure logico-grammatical forms). Just so the general doctrine of the pure
forms of the intuitions of states of affairs (and of the pure forms of states of
affairs) includes that of the categorial forms of intuitions (and of objective
categorial forms) in general.
If, as often happens, thinking is identiﬁed with judging, we should have
to distinguish between authentic and inauthentic judging. The concept of
judging would then be pinned down by the element common to statementintention and statement-fulﬁlment, i.e. by the intentional essence compounded
of quality and intentional material. As acts of thinking in the widest sense,
not only acts of judging, but also all possible part-acts in judgements, would
have to count: we should be brought back to a deﬁnition equivalent to our
previous deﬁnition of the concept Act of Thinking.
In the sphere of inauthentic thinking, of pure signiﬁcation, we are beyond
all bounds of categorial laws. Here anything and everything can be brought
together in unity. We spoke of this in our Fourth Investigation: we pointed
to the purely logico-grammatical laws which, as laws of complication and
modiﬁcation, distinguish the spheres of sense and nonsense. In inauthentic
categorial formation and transformation, we are free as long as our meanings
are not nonsensically conglomerated. But if we wish to avoid formal and
real nonsense, the widest sphere of inauthentic thought, of the signiﬁcatively
combinable, is very much narrowed. We are now concerned with the objective possibility of complex meanings, with the possibility of their application to
an intuition which fulﬁls them totally and singly. The pure laws of the validity of meanings, of the ideal possibility of their adequate intuitive illustration,
obviously runs parallel to the pure laws governing the combination and
transformation of authentic categorial forms.
In the pure laws of the validity of meanings, we are again not dealing with
laws from which the validity of any given meaning can be read off, but with
the possibilities, determined in purely categorial fashion, of the combination and transformation of meanings, that can be undertaken, salva veritate,
in each possible given case, i.e. without prejudicing the possibility of a fulﬁlment of meaning, to the extent that this previously existed. If, e.g., the
statement ‘w is a part of W ’ is valid, then a statement of the form ‘W is a
whole relatively to w’ is also valid. If it is true that there is an A which is B,
then it is also true that a certain A is B, or that not all A’s are not B’s etc. In
such propositions, what is material is boundlessly variable; hence all material meanings are replaced by algebraical signs of indirect and wholly unﬁxed
signiﬁcance. For this reason such propositions are characterized as analytic.
In this situation, it is again irrelevant whether the matter is constituted in
percepts or in imaginations. The possibilities and impossibilities concern the
setting up of acts giving adequate intuitive illustration to the form of a
meaning whatever its material substratum: we are concerned, in short, with
the pure conditions of the possibility of completely adequate signiﬁcation in
general, which, in their turn, depend on the pure conditions of the possibility

The a priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking 371

of categorial intuition in general. These laws of the validity of meanings
are not, of course, themselves identical with the authentic categorial laws,
but they follow the latter faithfully, in virtue of the law which regulates the
connection of signiﬁcant intentions with fulﬁlments of meaning.
The whole treatment that we have just completed requires a natural, obvious extension. We have simpliﬁed the matter to the extent of conﬁning our
discussion to two extremes only: we opposed completely intuitive, i.e. actually executed categorial act-forms, on the one hand, to purely signitive,
i.e. not authentically executed act-forms, on the other, forms only to be realized in processes of possible fulﬁlment. The ordinary cases are, however,
mixtures: thought proceeds intuitively in many stretches, in many stretches
signitively, here a categorial synthesis, a predication, a generalization is
really carried out, there a merely signitive intention directed to such a
categorial synthesis attaches to the intuitively, or to the only verbally presented members. The complex acts arising in this manner have, taken as a
whole, the character of inauthentic categorial intuitions: their total objective
correlate is not actually, only inauthentically, presented. Its ‘possibility’, i.e.
the objective possibility of its correlate, is not guaranteed. The sphere of
inauthentic thinking must accordingly be made wide enough for it to take in
these mixed act-forms also. Everything we have said then holds, mutatis
mutandis, for such an extension. Instead of talking of the laws of the validity
of mere meanings, merely symbolic judgements etc., we shall also have to
speak of the laws of the validity of signitively admixed presentations or
judgements. Where there is talk of merely symbolic thinking, it is generally
these mixed cases that one has in mind.

§64 The pure logico-grammatical laws are laws for
any understanding whatever, and not merely for any
human understanding. Their psychological meaning
and normative function in relation to inadequate
thought
Both sorts of laws are, of course, of an ideal nature. That a piece of sensory
stuff can only be apprehended in certain forms, and bound together according to certain forms, that the possible transformation of these forms is
subject to pure laws, in which the material element varies freely, that the
meanings to be expressed are likewise limited to certain forms, which they
can change only in prescribed manners, if they are not to lose their true
expressibility – all this does not depend on the empirical contingencies of
the course of consciousness, not even on the contingencies of our intellectual
or common-human organization. It depends on the speciﬁc nature of the acts
in question, on their intentional and epistemic essence; it belongs not to the
nature of just our (individual or common-human) sensibility, nor just our
understanding, but rather to the Ideas of Sensibility and Understanding in

372 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

general. An understanding governed by other than the purely logical laws
would be an understanding without understanding. If we deﬁne understanding, as opposed to sensibility, as the capacity for categorial acts, also, perhaps, as a capacity for expression and meaning directed upon such acts, and
made ‘right’ by them, then the general laws rooted in the speciﬁc nature
of these acts belong to the deﬁnitory essence of understanding. Other beings
may gaze upon other ‘worlds’, they may also be endowed with ‘faculties’
other than ours, but, if they are minded creatures at all, possessing some sort
of intentional experiences, with the relevant differences between perception
and imagination, straightforward and categorial intuition, meaning and
intuition, adequate and inadequate knowledge – then such creatures have
both sensibility and understanding, and are ‘subject’ to the pertinent laws.
The laws of authentic thinking naturally, therefore, belong also to the
nature of human consciousness, to our common human ‘psychic organization’.
But they are not characteristic of this organization in respect of its peculiar
character. The laws are rooted, we said, in the purely speciﬁc character of
certain acts: this means that they concern these acts not just in so far as they
occur together in a human organization. They pertain rather to all possible
organizations which can be made up of acts of this sort. The differentiating
peculiarities of each type of mental organization, all that distinguishes, e.g.,
the human consciousness as such, in the manner of a natural historical species, is not at all affected by such pure laws as are the laws of thought.
A relation to ‘our’ mental organization, or to ‘consciousness in general’
(understood as the aspects of consciousness common to men in general ), does
not deﬁne the pure and genuine, but a grossly distorted a priori. The notion
of a common mental organization, like that of a physical organization,
clearly has a merely ‘empirical’ meaning, the meaning of a mere ‘matter of
fact’. But pure laws are precisely pure of matter of fact, they tell us not what
is generally wont to be in this or that province of the real, but what absolutely goes beyond all wont and all divisions into spheres of reality, and that
for the reason that what is in question belongs to the essential make-up of
what is. The true logical a priori, therefore concerns all that pertains to the
ideal essence of understanding as such, to the essence of its act-species and
act-forms, to that, accordingly, which cannot be eliminated, as long as the
understanding, and the acts deﬁnitory of it, are what they are, i.e. thus and
thus natured, maintaining their selfsame conceptual essence.
The extent, accordingly, to which the logical laws and, in the ﬁrst instance, the ideal laws of authentic thinking, also claim a psychological meaning, and the extent to which they govern the course of actual mental
happenings, is at once clear. Each genuine ‘pure’ law, expressing a compatibility or an incompatibility grounded in the nature of a given species, will,
in relation to species of mentally realizable contents, limit the empirical
possibilities of psychological (phenomenological) coexistence and succession.
What is seen to be incompatible in specie, cannot be brought together, be

The a priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking 373

rendered compatible, in empirical instances. In so far as the logical thought
of experience is, to an incomparably major extent, conducted inadequately
and signitively, we can think, believe, many things which in truth, in the
manner of authentic thought, the actual carrying out of merely intended
syntheses, cannot be brought together at all. Just for this reason the a priori
laws of authentic thinking and authentic expression become norms for merely
opinion-forming, inauthentic thought and expression. Put somewhat differently: on the laws of authentic thinking other laws are founded, formulable
too as practical norms, which express in a manner suited to the sphere of
signitive or admixedly signitive presentation, the ideal conditions of a possible truth (or rightness in general), the ideal conditions, that is, of ‘logical’
compatibility (logical, since related to possible adequation) within this sphere
of admixedly signitive thinking. The laws of inauthentic thinking do not
hold psychologically like empirical laws governing the origin and change of
such thought, but as the possibilities or impossibilities of adequation founded
in their ideal purity in the variously formed acts of inauthentic thinking in
relation to corresponding acts of authentic thinking.

§65 The senseless problem of the real meaning of
the logical
We now also completely understand why the notion of a course of the world
violating the laws of logic – the analytic laws of authentic thinking and the
consequent norms of inauthentic thinking – or of the need or possibility
of ﬁrst grounding these laws in experience, the ‘matter of fact’ of sense, and
ﬁxing for them their limits of validity – is a piece of pure nonsense. We
ignore the fact that even a probabilistic grounding on facts is a grounding
which, as such, obeys ideal principles, principles which by anticipation we
see to rest upon ‘authentic’ experiences of probability, both as regards their
speciﬁc content and their status as laws. Here we must rather stress that the
so-to-say facticity of a fact belongs to sensibility, and that to call in sensibility to help provide a basis for purely categorial laws – laws whose very
meaning excludes all sensibility and facticity, which make pure assertions of
essence about categorial forms, as forms of possible correctness and truth as
such – represents a most obvious µετbβασι ε
 dλλο γνο. Laws which
refer to no fact cannot be conﬁrmed or refuted by a fact. The problem,
earnestly and profoundly treated by great philosophers, as to the ‘real or
formal meaning of the logical’, is therefore a nonsensical problem. One
requires no metaphysical or other theories to explain the agreement of the
course of nature and the ‘native’ regularities of the understanding. Instead of
an explanation, one needs only a phenomenological clariﬁcation of meaning,
thinking and knowing, and of the ideas and laws which spring from these.
The world constitutes itself as a sensuous unity: its very meaning is to be
the unity of actual and possible straightforward percepts. Its true being,

374 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

however, precludes its being adequately given, or given without qualiﬁcation, in any closed process of perception. It is for us always a quite inadequately meant unity for theoretical research, in part intended through
straightforward and categorial intuition, in part through signiﬁcation. The
further our knowledge progresses, the better and more richly will the idea of
the world be determined, the more, too, will inconsistencies be excluded
from it. To doubt whether the world really is as it appears to us to be, or as
it is thought of in contemporary theoretical science, and as it counts for the
well-grounded belief of the latter, has a good sense, since inductive science
can never construct an adequate world-picture, however far it may carry us.
But it is also nonsensical to doubt whether the true course of the world, the
true structure of the world in itself, could conﬂict with the forms of thinking. For this would mean that a deﬁnite, hypothetically assumed sensibility,
which would bring the world to adequate representation in an ideally complete set of unending perceptual processes, would be capable of assuming
categorial forms, while forcing syntheses upon them that are generically
ruled out by the universal nature of such forms. That they are thus ruled
out, and that the laws of the categories hold as pure laws in abstraction
from all sensuous stuff, and are accordingly unaffected by limitless variation
of such stuff, this we do not merely think, but we see it to be true. It is given
to us in fullest adequacy. This insight is of course achieved subjectively on
the basis of any casual empirical intuition, but it is a generic insight relating purely to form. The basis of abstraction contains in this case, as in
others, nothing presupposed by the ideal possibility and validity of the Idea
abstracted from it.
It would further be possible to demonstrate ad nauseam the absurdity
involved in considering the possibility of an illogical course of the world
in signitive thought, thereby making this possibility hold, and destroying
in one breath, so to say, the laws which make this or any other possibility
hold at all. We could also point out that a correlation with perceivability,
intuitability, meanability and knowability, is inseparable from the sense of
being in general, and that the ideal laws, therefore, which pertain to these
possibilities in specie, can never be set aside by the contingent content of
what itself happens to be at the moment. But enough of such argumentations,
which merely ring the changes on one and the same position, and have
already given us guidance in the Prolegomena.

§66 Distinction between the most important
differences mixed up in the current opposition of
‘intuiting’ and ‘thinking’
The above investigations should have imported a satisfactory, general clearness into the much used, but little clariﬁed, relation between thinking and
intuiting. We here list the following oppositions, whose confusion has vexed

The a priori laws of authentic and inauthentic thinking 375

epistemological research so inordinately, and whose distinctness has become
quite clear to ourselves.
1. The opposition between intuition and signiﬁcation. Intuition as perception or imagination – it is irrelevant whether categorial or sensuous,
adequate or inadequate – is opposed to mere thinking, as merely signiﬁcative
reference. Our parenthetically noted differences are, of course, generally
ignored. We consider them very important, and now specially stress them.
2. The opposition between sensuous and categorial intuition. We therefore
oppose sensuous intuition in the ordinary, straightforward sense, to categorial
intuition, or intuition in the extended sense. The founded acts, characteristic
of the latter, now count as the thought which ‘intellectualizes’ sensuous
intuition.
3. The opposition between inadequate and adequate intuition, or, more
generally, between adequate and inadequate presentation (since we are classing intuitive and signiﬁcative presentation together). In an inadequate representation we merely think that something is so (appears so), in adequate
presentation we look at the matter itself, and are for the ﬁrst time made
acquainted with its full selfhood.
4. The opposition between individual intuition (usually conceived, with
what is plainly baseless narrowness, as sensuous intuition) and universal
intuition. A new concept of intuition is ﬁxed by means of this opposition. It
is opposed to generalization, and so, further, to the categorial acts implying
generalization, and also, in unclear admixture, to the signiﬁcative counterparts of such acts. ‘Intuition’, we now say, merely presents the individual,
while ‘thought’ points to the universal, is carried out by way of ‘concepts’.
One generally speaks in this context of the opposition between ‘intuition and
concept’.
How strongly we tend to let these oppositions shade into one another
would be shown by a criticism of Kant’s theory of knowledge, which throughout bears the impress of the failure to draw any clear distinction among
these oppositions. In Kant’s thought categorial (logical) functions play a
great role, but he fails to achieve our fundamental extension of the concepts
of perception and intuition over the categorial realm, and this because he
fails to appreciate the deep difference between intuition and signiﬁcation,
their possible separation and their usual commixture. And so he does not
complete his analysis of the difference between the inadequate and adequate
adaptation of meaning to intuition. He therefore also fails to distinguish
between concepts, as the universal meanings of words, and concepts as species of authentic universal presentation, and between both, and concepts as
universal objects, as the intentional correlates of universal presentations.
Kant drops from the outset into the channel of a metaphysical epistemology
in that he attempts a critical ‘saving’ of mathematics, natural science and
metaphysics, before he has subjected knowledge as such, the whole sphere
of acts in which pre-logical objectivation and logical thought are performed,

376 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

to a clarifying critique and analysis of essence, and before he has traced
back the primitive logical concepts and laws to their phenomenological
sources. It was ominous that Kant (to whom we nonetheless feel ourselves
quite close) should have thought he had done justice to the domain of pure
logic in the narrowest sense, by saying that it fell under the principle of
contradiction. Not only did he never see how little the laws of logic are all
analytic propositions in the sense laid down by his own deﬁnition, but he
failed to see how little his dragging in of an evident principle for analytic
propositions really helped to clear up the achievements of analytic thinking.

Additional note to the Second Edition
All the main obscurities of the Kantian critique of reason depend ultimately
on the fact that Kant never made clear to himself the peculiar character of
pure Ideation, the adequate survey of conceptual essences, and of the laws
of universal validity rooted in those essences. He accordingly lacked the
phenomenologically correct concept of the a priori. For this reason he could
never rise to adopting the only possible aim of a strictly scientiﬁc critique of
reason: the investigation of the pure, essential laws which govern acts as
intentional experiences, in all their modes of sense-giving objectivation, and
their fulﬁlling constitution of ‘true being’. Only a perspicuous knowledge of
these laws of essence could provide us with an absolutely adequate answer
to all the questions regarding our understanding, questions which can be
meaningfully raised in regard to the ‘possibility of knowledge’.

Third Section

Clarification of our
introductory problem

YHH

Chapter 9

Non-objectifying acts as apparent
fulfilments of meaning

§67 That not every act of meaning includes an act
of knowing
Having gone far enough in our investigation of the relation between
meaning and corresponding intuition in regard to much more general problems, and having thus done enough to lay bare the essence of authentic
and inauthentic expression, we have reached clearness on the difﬁcult issues
which troubled us at the beginning of this Investigation, and which ﬁrst
prompted us to undertake it.
We have, above all, rid ourselves of the temptation to conceive of the
meaning-function of expressions as in some sense a case of knowing, and in
fact a case of classiﬁcation, a temptation which springs from a line of thought
touched on above (§1), and which always crops up in important epistemological contexts. One says: An expression must surely give expression to
some act of the speaker, but in order that this act should ﬁnd its appropriate
speech-form, it must be suitably apperceived and known, a presentation as a
presentation, an attribution as an attribution, a negation as a negation etc.
Our reply is that talk of knowledge refers to a relationship between acts
of thought and fulﬁlling intuitions. Acts of thought are not, however, brought
to expression in statements and parts of statements, e.g. names, in such a
manner that they in their turn are thought of and known. Otherwise these
last acts would be the carriers of meaning, it would be they primarily that
were expressed, they would accordingly be in need of other new acts of
thought, and so on in inﬁnitum. If I call this intuited object a ‘watch’, I complete, in naming it, an act of thought and knowledge, but I know the watch,
and not my knowledge. This is naturally so in the case of all acts that confer
meaning. Should I utter the word ‘or’ in a context of expressive speech, I
carry out a disjunction, but my thought (of which the disjoining is a part)
is not trained upon the disjoining but upon the (objective) disjunctivum, in
so far as this last enters into the unitary state of affairs. This disjunctivum is
known and objectively denominated. The word ‘or’ is accordingly no name,
and likewise no non-independent appellation of disjoining; it merely gives

380 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

voice to this act. Naturally this applies also to complete judgements. If I
assert something, I think of things, that things stand in this or that manner:
this is what I express, and perhaps also know. But I do not think and know
my act of judging, as if I were also making it into my object, and were
classifying it as a judgement and naming it through this form of expression.
But does not the grammatical adaptation of expression to expressed
act point to an act of knowing in which such adaptation is performed? In
a certain manner or in certain cases it does, in all those cases, that is, where
the sense of ‘expression’ dealt with by us at the beginning of the present
Investigation is relevant. This is not the case where we are dealing with expression as a mere ‘voice-giving’, in which case all meaning-conferring counts
as expressed by our words (as verbal noises), and again not where ‘expression’
means the same as ‘meaning’, and what is expressed is one and the same
meaning. In the two latter senses, every statement, whether merely signiﬁcative
or intuitively fulﬁlled, expresses something: it expresses the judgement (our
conviction), or that ‘judgement’s content’ (the selfsame propositional meaning). But in the former sense only the intuitively fulﬁlled statement (or the
statement which is to be intuitively fulﬁlled) expresses something, in which
case not the verbal noise, but the already sense-enlivened locution represents
the ‘expression’ of the corresponding intuition. It is the function that lends
meaning to our words which is primarily and universally responsible for the
unitary interweaving of the signitive intentions attaching to those words.
The latter merely make up a signitive judgement, in which they lack all
fulﬁlling intuition: the synthesis of agreement or disagreement, which our
total signitive intention expresses (or claims to express) is here not authentically carried out, only signitively meant. But if, contrariwise, the indicated
synthesis is authentically carried out, the authentic synthesis will coincide
with the non-authentic one (the synthesis in signiﬁcation). Both are one
and the same intentional essence, representing one and the same meaning,
the simple, selfsame judgement, whether carried out intuitively or merely
signitively. Similar things plainly hold for cases where only some of our
verbalized intentions enjoy intuitive ‘fulness’. The signitive acts involve the
same meaning as the intuitive, though without the latter’s fulness; they merely
‘express’ this meaning. The suggestions of this word are the more ﬁtting,
since signitive acts likewise preserve the sense of an intuition after the latter
has disappeared, like an empty shell without the intuitive kernel. The unity
of coincidence is, in the case of the intuitive judgement, a true unity of
knowledge (if not a unity of relational cognition): we know, however, that,
in the unity of knowledge, it is not the fulﬁlling act (here the authentic
synthesis of judgement) that we know, but the fact which is its objective
correlate. In intuiting things we carry out a judging synthesis, an intuitive
thus it is or thus it is not. Because our expressive intention, with its associated word-sounds (the grammatical expression) applies itself to this act of
fact-envisagement, we achieve knowledge of the intuited fact in question.

Non-objectifying acts as apparent fulfilments of meaning 381

§68 The controversy regarding the interpretation
of the peculiar grammatical forms which express
non-objectifying acts
We now turn to a ﬁnal discussion of the seemingly trivial, but, correctly regarded, most important and difﬁcult point at issue (see above, §1 ff.) whether
the familiar grammatical forms used in our speech for wishes, questions,
voluntary intentions – acts, generally speaking, we do not class as ‘objectifying’ – are to be regarded as judgements concerning our acts, or whether
these acts themselves, and not merely such as are ‘objectifying’, can function
as ‘expressed’, whether in a sense-giving or sense-fulﬁlling fashion. We are
dealing with sentences like ‘Is π a transcendental number?’ ‘May heaven
help us!’ etc.
The teasing character of the question is shown by the fact that pre-eminent
logicians since Aristotle have been unable to agree on its answer. Statements
express the fact that something is, or that something is not, they assert, they
judge about something. In their case alone can one talk of true and false. A
wish or a question asserts nothing. We cannot object to one who utters them:
‘What you say is untrue’. He would not even understand our objection.
Bolzano thought this argument invalid. He said: ‘A question like “What
is the relation of the diameter of a circle to its circumference?” asserts
nothing about what it enquires into, but it asserts something nonetheless:
our desire, in fact, to be informed concerning the object asked about. It is
indeed capable of truth and falsehood, and is false when our desire is
mis-stated by it’ (Bolzano, Wissenschaftslehre 1, §22, p. 88).
We may doubt, however, whether Bolzano has not here confused two
things: the adequacy or inadequacy of an expression – here a word-sound –
to our thought, and the truth or falsehood which relates it to the content
of that thought, and its adequacy to the thing. Regarding the adequacy of
an expression (as word-sound) to our thought, we can speak in two senses,
one which relates to unsuitability – as when a speaker chooses to express the
thoughts which ﬁll his mind in words whose customary meaning conﬂicts
with the latter – and one relating to untruthfulness, i.e. to deliberately deceptive, lying speech – as when the speaker does not wish to express the thoughts
actually ﬁlling his mind, but others at variance with these, and merely imagined by him: he wishes to express these thoughts as if they were ﬁlling his
mind. A suitable, sincerely employed expression can still state both what is
true and what is false, according as through its sense it expresses what is or
is not, or, what is the same, according as its sense can be adequately fulﬁlled
or frustrated by a possible adequate percept.
One might now counter Bolzano as follows. One can talk of sincerity and
insincerity, of suitability and unsuitability, in the case of every expression,
but one can only talk of truth and falsehood in the case of statements. A
speaker can, accordingly, be objected to in different ways. ‘What you say is

382 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

false’: this is the factual objection. And ‘You are not speaking sincerely’ or
‘You are expressing yourself unsuitably’: this is the objection of insincerity
or inadequacy of speech. Objections of the latter sort are the only ones that
can be made to a questioner. He is perhaps pretending, or is using his words
incorrectly, and saying something different from what he intends to say. But
one can raise no factual objection to him, since he is making no factual
claim. If one treats the objection concerned with unsuitability of expression
as showing that a question expresses a judgement, one, i.e., that would be
completely expressed in the form ‘I am asking whether . . .’, one would have in
consistency to treat each expression in the same manner, and so to treat the
true sense of each statement whatever as being what we adequately express
in the word-form ‘I am asserting that . . .’. But the same would have to hold
of these restatements, which would accordingly land us in an inﬁnite regress.
In all this it is easily seen that this abundance of ever new statements is no
mere abundance of words, but yields new statements by no means equivalent to the original ones, let alone identical in meaning. Does such nonsensical
consistency not compel us to acknowledge an essential difference between
one order of sentence-forms and another? (How this difference really must
be interpreted is explained in our next section: cf. the ﬁnal paragraph.)
Here two positions can be taken up. Either one can say: The question of
sincerity affects every utterance: a judgement accordingly pertains to each
utterance as such, a judgement relating to the experience of the speaker
which is to be intimated. A man who speaks, intimates something, and to
this the intimating judgement corresponds. But what is intimated or expressed
differs from case to case: the interrogative sentence intimates a question,
the imperative sentence a command, the indicative sentence a judgement.
Each indicative sentence therefore implies a double judgement, a judgement,
namely, about this or that fact, and a second judgement, passed by the
speaker as such, upon this ﬁrst judgement as his own experience.
This appears to be Sigwart’s position. We read (Logik, 1, 2nd edn, 17 f.
Note):
The imperative undoubtedly includes an assertion, to the effect, namely,
that the speaker wills the action he is demanding, the optative that he
wishes what he utters. This assertion is involved in the fact of speech,
not in the content of what he utters; every statement of the form A is B
accordingly involves the assertion, based on the mere fact of speech,
that the thinker thinks and believes what he says. These assertions regarding the subjective state of the speaker, involved in the fact that he
speaks, and valid on the assumption of his sincerity, accompany all
speech in the same fashion, and can accordingly not serve as a basis for
differentiating our various sentence-forms.
Another way of conceiving the matter would be to reject the ‘intimating
judgement’, and to regard the consequent duplication of judgement in the

Non-objectifying acts as apparent fulfilments of meaning 383

case of indicative sentences as a contingent complication, only exceptionally
present, and ﬁrst brought into the picture, moreover, by descriptive reﬂection.
Against this one might hold that, in each case of adequate, not contextually
elliptical speech what was expressed was essentially one, in the interrogative sentence a question, in the optative sentence a wish, in the indicative
sentence a judgement. Before I had completed these Investigations, I myself
thought this position unavoidable, hard as it was to reconcile with the
phenomenological facts. I thought myself compelled by the following arguments, that I now accompany with suitable criticism.

§69 Arguments for and against the Aristotelian
conception
According to the doctrine which is opposed to that of Aristotle, a man
who, e.g., utters a question will be communicating to another his wish to be
informed regarding the state of affairs in question. This communication
regarding the speaker’s actual experience is, it is held, a statement like any
communication. In the form of the question itself there is no express saying
that one is asking whether . . . ; this form only marks off the question as a
question. Our speech, therefore, is a case of contextual ellipticity. The circumstances of utterance make it obvious that it is the speaker himself who
asks the question. The complete meaning of the sentence does not, accordingly lie in what its mere word-sounds suggest, but is determined by the
occasion, the context, the relation to the person speaking at the moment.
In favour of the Aristotelian conception, many replies could now be given.
(a) The argument ought to apply equally to indicative sentences, so that
we have to interpret the sentence ‘S is P’ as a contextual ellipsis for the new
expression ‘I judge that S is P’, and so on in inﬁnitum.
(b) The argument is based on the view that the expressed sense of the
interrogative sentence differs from its real sense. For, undeniably, in the
interrogative or wish-sentence, the relation of the wish to the wisher does
not need to be brought out, as little as, in the case of the indicative sentence,
the relation of the judgement to the judging person. If this relation is not
part of the explicit sense of the sentence, but only of its contextually variable
part, this concession gives one all that one could want. The explicit meaning
can be altered in certain circumstances, but there will surely also be circumstances where it will be just what we mean. In such cases the mere question
(and similarly the mere request or command etc.) will receive wholly adequate expression.
(c) More careful comparison with the indicative sentences of ordinary
speech favours the Aristotelian conception. In verbal communication such a
sentence intimates that one is judging, and it is the grammatical form of the
indicative sentence which brings out the judgement as such. On the utterance of such grammatically framed speech, the effect forthwith attends, that

384 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

the person addressed takes the speaker to be judging. This effect cannot,
however, constitute the meaning of the expression, which surely means the
same in soliloquy as in communicative speech. The meaning lies rather in
the act of judging as the identical judgement-content.
The same could be the case in regard to interrogative sentences. The
meaning of an interrogative sentence is unchanged whether we deal with an
internal question or an overt one. The relation of speaker to person addressed belongs here, as in the case compared, to the merely communicative
function. And just as in that case the ‘content of judgement’, i.e. a certain
speciﬁc character of judgement, determined in this or that manner as regards content, constituted the meaning of the indicative sentence, so here
the content of the question constitutes the meaning of the interrogative
sentence. In both cases the ordinary meaning can undergo circumstantial
modiﬁcations. We may utter an indicative sentence with the primary intention, not of communicating the relevant state of affairs, but the fact that
we have the conviction in question, and mean to put it forward. This intention, buttressed, perhaps, by non-grammatical aids (stress, gesture), may be
understood. Here what underlies our words is a judgement relating to our
explicit judgement. Just so, in the case of an interrogative or wish-sentence,
our primary intention may lie, not in our mere wish, but in the fact that we
wish to express the wish to a hearer. Naturally this interpretation could
not hold in all cases. It could not hold, e.g., where a burning wish bursts
spontaneously from the heart. The expression then is intimately one with
the wish, it clings to it immediately and directly.
Criticism. Regarded more closely, this argument only proves that a thought
relating to the communicative function cannot be part of the sense of every
sentence. The opposing argument is refuted: it rests on the false assumption
that all expression is communicative, and that communication is always
a judgement regarding the internal (intimated) experiences of the speaker.
But its thesis is unrefuted, at least when suitably modiﬁed. For we cannot
exclude the possibility that the controversial wish-, request-, and commandsentences etc., are still judgements about the relevant experienced acts of
wishing, asking and willing, and that it is only as being so, that they can give
these experiences adequate expression. If there is no place for judgements
here in the narrower sense of predications – Aristotle certainly had this
conception of the controversial sentences – perhaps there is place for them
in a wider sense of assertive objectivations in general.
1. As regards (a) we note, further, that the case of statements is not the
same as, e.g., that of questions. If we transform the sentence ‘S is P’ into the
sentence ‘I judge that S is P’, or into any related sentence, which expresses
a relation to the judging person, however indeﬁnitely, we obtain not merely
altered meanings, but such as are not equivalent to the original ones: for the
straightforward sentence may be true, the subjectivized sentence false, and
conversely. The situation is wholly different in the case compared. Even if

Non-objectifying acts as apparent fulfilments of meaning 385

one refuses to speak of true and false in this case, one can surely always ﬁnd
a statement that ‘in essence says the same’ as the original question or wishform, e.g. ‘Is S P?’ = ‘I should like to know . . .’ or ‘One would like to know
whether S is P’ etc. May such sentence-forms not imply a relation to the
speaker, even if only indeﬁnitely and subsidiarily? Does the preservation of
‘essential meaning’ in the transformed indicative forms not point to the fact
that the meaning-giving acts are at least of the same general sort as judgements? These considerations also deal with (b): not the mere experience of
wishing or willing, but the inner intuition of these experiences (and the
signiﬁcation adapted to this intuition) will be relevant to our meaning. This
conception is, however, affected by the following argument:
2. There is another way in which one might try to interpret the expressed
forms in question as judgements. If we utter a wish, even in soliloquy, we
put it, and the wished-for content, into words, we accordingly have a presentation of it, and of what constitutes it. The wish is, however, not any
merely presented wish, but the living wish that we have just taken note of.
And it is this wish, and this wish as such, that we want to intimate. It is not,
accordingly, our mere presentation, but our inner percept, i.e. really a judgement, that achieves expression. It is not, indeed, a judgement of the same
sort as our ordinary assertions, that predicate something of something. In
the expression of a wish, it is only our concern to grasp the internally noted
experience conceptually (signiﬁcatively) in straightforward afﬁrmation, and
to express its simple existence. It is not our concern to make a relational
predication about such an experience, connecting it with the experiencing
subject.
Against this conception it may be objected that the situation is exactly the
same for expressed judgements as for all other expressed experiences. If we
state something, we judge, and our words cover not only the presentation
underlying our judgement, but also our judgement itself (i.e. in the form of
an assertion). We should, therefore, also conclude here that the judgement is
internally perceived, and that the meaning of our statement lies in the straightforwardly afﬁrmative judgement about what we perceive, i.e. about our
judgement. If no one ﬁnds such a conception acceptable in the case of a
statement, it cannot be seriously entertained in the case of other independent sentences. We recall what was said in our last section. The expressions
which ﬁt themselves to the expressed experiences, are not related to them
in the way that names are, nor in any analogous manner. Our experiences
are not ﬁrst objectively presented, and then brought under concepts, as if,
together with each new word, a subsumption or predication had taken place.
A person who judges gold to be yellow, does not judge that the presentation
which accompanies his use of the word ‘gold’ is yellow: he does not judge
that the manner of judging he carries out when he utters the word ‘is’ falls
under the concept ‘is’ etc. The word ‘is’ does not in fact symbolize judgement, but the being which is found in a state of affairs. ‘Gold’, likewise,

386 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

does not name a presentative experience: it names a metal. Expressions
name experiences only when such experiences have been made objects of
presentation or judgement in reﬂection. The same holds for all words, even
syncategorematic ones, in their relation to what is objective: they mean this
in their fashion even when they do not name it.
Expressions are not therefore associated as names with the acts which ﬁll
our minds at each moment, acts in which we live without judging about
them reﬂectively: such expressions belong rather to the concrete being of the
acts themselves. To judge expressly is to judge, to wish expressly is to wish.
To name a judgement or wish is not to judge or wish, but merely to name.
A judgement named need never be judged by the man who names it, a wish
named never wished by him. And, even when this is not so, the naming
expresses no judgement or no wish, but a presentation related to one or the
other.
Criticism. This objection also exposes the weakness of our at ﬁrst attractive
preliminary argument. It is clear from it, as from our previous discussions,
that not every expression (qua the expression it is) presupposes a judgement
or other act, which makes the intimated experience its object. This again
does not dispose of the thesis: we have not shown, just in the case of the
sentence-forms under discussion, that they are not judgements about momentary wishing, questioning or requesting experiences, or that they do not
express their straightforward existence in the speaker. True, to name a wish
is not therefore to wish, but is experiencing a wish and naming it in the same
breath, not also a case of wishing? So that, even if expressed wishing is necessarily a wishing which involves naming and stating, the proposition still
holds, that expressed wishing is wishing and not mere naming.
3. The controversial expressions have the form of sentences, and at times
the form of categorical sentences with subjects and predicates. From this
it follows that they can also be treated as having predication in their content, and not merely as predications in relation to one, same, unmentioned
subject ‘I’. E.g. ‘May God protect the Kaiser’, ‘The coachman should harness the horses’. A ‘may’ or a ‘should’ is uttered: the subject in question is
apprehended as standing under a requisition or an obligation.
One could here rejoin: Where a ‘should’ counts as an objective predicate
and is actually attributed as such, the should-sentence has not merely the
force of a wish or a command, or not this alone. An objective obligation can
be said to hold, though the man stating it need experience no act of the kind
which constitutes an actual consciousness of obligation. If I know that someone’s will is bound by a relationship of service or by custom or morality, I
can judge that he should and must do something. But this expresses no
living wish, desire or obligation. Statements of obligation may indeed serve
in appropriate contexts to express acts of this sort, e.g. ‘John must harness
the horses!’ But it is clear that here no mere objective obligation is expressed, but my own will, and this not in my words, but rather in my tone

Non-objectifying acts as apparent fulfilments of meaning 387

and in the circumstances. In such circumstances the predicative form doubtless
does duty for an imperative or optative form, i.e. the thought-predication
implied by the words is either not carried out at all, or is merely subsidiary.
It is undeniable, lastly, that the predicative interpretation only is plausible in
certain cases, and not in the case in question. B. Erdmann, who otherwise
leans towards it, does not favour it in this case. (See B. Erdmann, Logic, 11,
§45, pp. 271 ff.)
Criticism. It may be questioned whether this refutation sufﬁces. That a
should-predicate has an objective sense and value cannot be doubted. But
that, where this is not true, nothing is predicated or at least judged, is by no
means proved. One might maintain: When we issue a command to someone,
e.g. a command to the coachman John to harness the horses, he counts for
us as someone subordinate to our will: he is apprehended as such by us and
accordingly addressed in this form of expression. We say: ‘John, harness
the horses!’ That he is one who should harness horses is here predicated of
him, naturally in the expectation of corresponding practical results, and not
merely to attest that he counts as such for me. The expression of the command is relative. We can think of no one commanded, without at the same
time thinking, deﬁnitely or indeﬁnitely, of someone who commands him.
This being wholly obvious requires no explicit expression. Instead of the
cumbrous form ‘I command etc.’, we employ the brief imperative, whose
form points to a communicative relation. The speech-forms ‘should’ and
‘must’ were not originally used by a commander in face of the commanded
to express his actual voluntary intent, but only when a more objective expression of his own or someone else’s voluntary intent was needed, e.g.
when there was a third person relaying someone else’s command or when a
legislating will found expression in a law. When communication between
commander and commanded lapses, the imperative, which ﬁts the conscious
situation of the former, loses application. This conception can be applied
generally. One can say: In the optative, what we wish is presented as wished,
and stated to be such. Just so, in a requesting form, what we request is
presented as requested, in a question what we ask presented as asked etc.
These acts are related in our presentation to their intentional objects, and
are so themselves made objective as reﬂexive predicates attaching to the
latter.
In the communicative situation, many others of the expressions in question have, like commands, the role of telling the hearer (like essentially
occasional expressions) that the speaker is performing certain intimated acts
(of request, congratulation, condolence etc.) with an intentional regard to
his auditor. To the extent that expressions of all sorts may in full consciousness be informed by the wish to communicate with others, and to acquaint
others with one’s own convictions, doubts, hopes etc., they are perhaps all
accompanied by reﬂex acts directed upon such inner experiences and, more
precisely, by acts which intuitively relate the latter to the speaker and to the

388 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

person addressed. This accordingly holds of communicative statements as
well. These acts of reﬂection and reference do not on that account form part
of the meaning of a statement and of all other expressions, but this may very
well be said of expressions of our controversial class, in virtue of which they
are in all cases directed to inner experiences of the speaker.
In solitary mental life – if we disregard exceptional cases of talking to
oneself, asking oneself questions, desiring or commanding oneself – relation
to an auditor falls away, and the subjective expressions in question, which
are still applicable, express the simple being of inner experiences in more
or less deﬁnite relation to the subject. In a monologue a question is either
of the form ‘I ask myself whether . . .’, or relation to the subject vanishes
entirely: the interrogative expression becomes a mere name, or not really
even that. For the normal use of a name is in a context of predicative or
attributive relation, of which there is here no question. Since the expression
becomes one with the intuited inner experience as a knowing of the latter,
an interweaving of factors arises having the character of a self-enclosed
phenomenon. To the extent that, in such interweaving, we live principally in
an interrogative act, with which our expression merely ﬁts in, and to which
it gives articulate voice, the whole interweaving is called a question. Knowledge is not here a theoretical function – this is the case only in predication,
while here nothing is predicated. The question is known and expressed,
without being ‘subjectivized’, in the sense of being made either the subject or
the object of predicative acts. Plainly this directly expressive sense of the
interrogative sentence helps to constitute the predicative interrogation – I
ask myself whether etc. – or the meaning which corresponds to such altered
circumstances.

§70 Decision
If by a ‘judgement’ one means a predicative act, then our discussions have
shown that our disputed sentences do not invariably express judgements.
Even in these cases, however, an unbridgeable gulf separates us from the
logicians who side with Aristotle. On their view, names, statements, optative
sentences, interrogations, commands etc., are coordinated expressive forms,
and coordinated in the following manner: names express presentations,
statements express judgements, optative sentences express wishes etc. Presentations, judgements, questions etc., in short, acts of all sorts, can serve to
confer meaning in exactly the same fashion, for to ‘express acts’ means the
same in all cases, i.e. to have one’s meaning in such acts. We, on the other
hand, see a fundamental difference between names and statements, on the
one hand, and the expressions of our controversial group, on the other. The
acts of presentation or judging expressed by names or statements may
confer or fulﬁl meaning, but are not therefore meant; they do not become
objects of naming and predication, but are constitutive of such objects. On

Non-objectifying acts as apparent fulfilments of meaning 389

the other hand we ﬁnd, in ﬂat contrast, that the acts ‘expressed’ by our controversial expressions, though seeming to confer meanings, are made into
objects. This may happen, as we saw, through inner intuition reﬂectively
directed upon such acts, and generally also through relational acts based on
such intuitions. It may also happen by way of certain acts of signiﬁcation,
perhaps only partially uttered, which attach as cognitions to these inner
intuitions and acts of relating, thereby making their objects, the acts, namely,
of asking, wishing, commanding etc., into objects named and otherwise
talked of, and perhaps into components of predicated states of affairs. In
these acts of objectiﬁcation lie the true meanings of our controversial expressions. We are not in their case concerned with acts which confer meaning in
some fundamentally new manner, but only with contingent speciﬁcations of
the one, unique class of meaning-intentions. And, just so, the acts which
fulﬁl meaning do not fall into different classes, but belong to the one, unique
class of intuitions. It is not the wishes, commands etc., themselves that are
expressed by these grammatical patterns and their signiﬁcations; it is rather
the intuitions of these acts that serve as fulﬁlments. When we compare
indicative with optative sentences, we must not coordinate judgements with
wishes, but states of affairs with wishes.
What results accordingly is the fact that:
The ostensible expressions of non-objectifying acts are really contingent
speciﬁcations of statements and other expressions of objectifying acts which
have an immense practical and communicative importance.
The contentious issue here dealt with is of fundamental importance, since
on its solution depends, on the one hand, whether we accept a doctrine
which makes all meaning, whether in intention or fulﬁlment, of a single kind
– the genus of objectifying acts, with their fundamental division into the
signiﬁcative and the intuitive – or whether, on the other hand, we decide to
permit acts of all sorts to confer or fulﬁl meaning. The issue is, of course,
not less important because it is the ﬁrst to call our attention to the fundamental triplicity of the ambiguity of talk about ‘expressed acts’, on whose
analysis our present Investigation ﬁrst embarked (cf. §2 above). There it was
said that we may mean by ‘expressed acts’:
1. The signiﬁcative acts which give expressions meaning, and which have,
in their signiﬁcative fashion, a certain objectivity of reference.
2. The intuitive acts, which frequently fulﬁl the signiﬁcant intent of an
expression, and so represent the signiﬁcantly meant objects intuitively, and
in a parallel intuitive ‘sense’.
3. The acts which are the objects of signiﬁcation, and likewise of intuition,
in all cases where an expression (in sense 2) expresses the speaker’s own
experiences of the moment. If these are not objectifying acts, their nature will
not permit them to function under the rubrics 1 and 2.
The root of all our difﬁculties lies in the fact that, in the direct application of
expressions (or acts to be expressed) to intuitively grasped inner experiences,

390 Elements of a phenomenological elucidation of knowledge

our signiﬁcative acts are completely fulﬁlled by the inner intuition which
attaches to them, so that both are most intimately blended, while these same
intuitions, being internal, exhaust themselves in the straightforward presentation of the acts that they mean.
Finally we must observe that the distinction made above as against Bolzano
– between cases where only the subjective objection can be raised – the
objection to the expression’s sincerity or adequacy – and cases where the
factual objection can be raised – the objection related to objective truth and
falsity – that this distinction has, on a closer survey, no true connection with
our controversial question. For it has a quite general concern with the difference between expressions relating to intuitively envisaged act-experiences,
and experiences not so relating. In the ﬁrst class there are many quite uncontroversial predications, e.g. all statements of the form ‘I ask whether . . .’,
‘I command, wish that . . .’ etc. And, be it noted, there can be no factual
objections to subjective judgements thus formulated: they are true or false,
but truth here coincides with sincerity. In the case of other statements which
aim at what is ‘objective’ (i.e. not at the self-expressing subject and his
experiences) the factual question concerns our meaning. The question of
sincerity depends on the possibility of seeming assertions, from which the
genuine, normal act of meaning is absent. Really there is no judgement; the
meaning of a statement is presented in the context of an intent to deceive.

Appendix

Appendix 391

External and internal perception:
physical and psychical phenomena

1
The concepts of external perception and perception of self, of sensuous and
internal perception, have for the naïve man the following content. External
perception is the perception of external things, their qualities and relationships, their changes and interactions. Perception of self is the perception that
each can have of his own ego and its properties, its states and activities.
Asked who this perceived ego may be, the naïve man would reply by pointing to his bodily appearance, or would recount his past and present experiences. To the further question whether all this is included in his percept
of self, he would naturally reply that, just as the perceived external thing
has many properties, and has had many in the course of its changes, which
are not for the moment ‘open to perception’, so a corresponding fact holds
for his perceived ego. In the changing acts of self-perception appear, on
occasion, such and such presentations, feelings, wishes and bodily activities
of the ego, just as the exterior or the interior of a house, or such and such
sides and parts of it, enter from time to time into outer perception. Naturally,
however, the ego remains the perceived object in the one case, as the house
is in the other.
For the naïve man our second pair of notions, that of sensuous and internal perception, does not altogether coincide with the pair just discussed, that
of outward perception and perception of self. We perceive sensuously what
we perceive by the eye and the ear, by smell and taste, in brief, through the
organs of sense. In this ﬁeld everyone locates, not only external things, but
his own body and bodily activities, such as walking, eating, seeing, hearing
etc. What we call ‘inner perception’, on the other hand, concerns mainly
such ‘spiritual’ experiences as thinking, feeling and willing, but also everything that we locate, like these, in the interior of our bodies, do not connect
with our outward organs.
In philosophical diction, both pairs of terms – we usually prefer the pair
of ‘internal and external perception’ – express only one pair of concepts.
After Descartes had sharply separated mens and corpus, Locke, using the

392 Elements of a phenomenological eludication of knowledge

terms ‘sensation’ and ‘reﬂection’, introduced the two corresponding classes
of perception into modern philosophy. This division has remained in force till
today. External perception was regarded, following Locke, as our perception
of bodies, while inner perception was the perception that our ‘spirits’ or ‘souls’
have of their own activities (their cogitationes in the Cartesian sense). A
division of perceptions is accordingly mediated by a division among the objects
of perception, though a difference in origin is likewise set beside it. In one
case perception arises from the effects of physical things operating through
the senses on our spirits, in the other case out of a reﬂection on the activities
carried out by the mind on the basis of ‘ideas’ won through sensation.

2
In quite recent times men have been much concerned to achieve an adequate
overhaul and a deepening of Locke’s obviously vague and rough positions.
General epistemological interests were, on the one hand, responsible for this
move. We recall the traditional estimate of the relative value for knowledge
of the two forms of perception: external perception is deceptive, inner perception evident. In this evidence lies one of the basic pillars of knowledge, which
scepticism cannot shake. Inner perception is also the only case of perception where the object truly corresponds to the act of perception, is, in fact,
immanent in it. It is also, to speak pointedly, the one type of perception that
deserves the name. In the interest of perceptual theory, we must therefore
enter more exactly into the essence of inner, as opposed to outer perception.
Psychological interests were, on the other hand, involved. Men were concerned with the much-debated ﬁxing of the domain of empirical psychology
and, particularly, with establishing for it its own justiﬁcation as against the
natural sciences, by marking out for it a peculiar territory of phenomena.
Even the prime place in epistemology readily accorded to psychology as
basic philosophical discipline, required that its objects be deﬁned with as
few epistemological commitments as possible; it should not, therefore, concern itself with transcendent realities of so controversial a type as soul and
body as if they were obvious data. Locke’s classiﬁcation of perceptions had
just such a presupposition: it was therefore at once unsuited, and not in fact
designed, to serve as a basis for a deﬁnition of psychology, and to do justice
to the interests mentioned. It is clear, further, that if a distinction of perceptions is set up on the basis of an anticipated distinction between bodily
and spiritual matters, then the former distinction cannot be used as a basis
of distinction between the science of bodily and the science of spiritual
phenomena. The matter would be different if one could succeed in ﬁnding
purely descriptive marks for a division of percepts, marks which left our
classes unaltered in extent, and which, while lacking all epistemological presuppositions, would serve to demarcate the corresponding bodily phenomena
from psychic phenomena.

Appendix 393

A possible path seemed here to be opened by the Cartesian approach
through doubt, with its emphasis on the epistemological position of inner
perception. We have already touched on this above. The line of thought,
which develops here, runs as follows:
However widely I may extend my critical doubts regarding knowledge,
I cannot doubt that I exist and am doubting, or again, while I experience
them, that I am having presentations, am judging, feeling or however else
I may designate such inwardly perceived appearances: to doubt in such a
case would evidently be irrational. We accordingly have absolute ‘evidence’
regarding the existence of the objects of inner perception, we have that
clearest cognition, that unassailable certainty which distinguishes knowledge
in the strictest sense. It is quite different in the case of outer perception.
It lacks ‘evidence’, and the frequent conﬂicts in statements relying upon it
point, in fact, to its capacity to deceive. We have therefore no right to
assume from the outset that the objects of outer perception really and truly
exist as they seem to us to be. We have, in fact, many reasons to think that
they do not really exist at all, but can at best lay claim to a phenomenal or
‘intentional’ existence. If one makes the reality of a perceived object part of
the notion of perception, then outer perception is not, in this strict sense,
perception at all. This evident character will in any case give us a descriptive
mark, free from presuppositions regarding metaphysical realities, which will
enable us to sort out our various classes of perceptions. It is a character
given with, or absent from, the perceptual experience itself, and this alone
determines our division.
If we now consider the phenomena presented by these various classes of
perceptions, they unmistakably constitute essentially distinct classes. This is
not to assert that the objects in themselves, i.e. the souls and bodies, that we
rightly or wrongly range under them, differ essentially: a purely descriptive
treatment that avoids all transcendence establishes an unbridgeable gulf
between these phenomena. On the one side we have the sensory qualities,
which in themselves form a descriptively closed class, whether there are
such things as senses and sense-organs or not. They form a Kind in the
strict Aristotelian sense of the word. To these are added features necessarily
attaching, either to sense-qualities in general, or to single ranges of such qualities (again strict Aristotelian species), or, conversely, features themselves
necessarily presupposing qualities, and only able to achieve concrete being
in association with them. Here well-known propositions come up for treatment, e.g. no intuited spatiality without quality. Many would say that the
converse obtained also: No quality without something spatial. Others would
here only approve particular cases: No colour, no tactile quality without
something spatial. Further propositions of the same class would be: No
tone-quality without intensity, no timbre without tone-qualities etc.1
On the other side we have phenomena such as having presentations, judgements, surmises, wishes, hopes etc. We here enter, as it were, another world.

394 Elements of a phenomenological eludication of knowledge

These phenomena have relation to what is sensible, but are not themselves
to be compared with the latter: they do not belong to one and the same
(genuine) kind. When we have ﬁrst clearly seen the descriptive unity of this
class through examples, one ﬁnds, with a little attention, a positive mark
which characterizes them all: the mark of ‘intentional inexistence’.
One can of course use the above descriptive distinction of inner and outer
perception to arrive at just such a distinction of the two classes of phenomena.
It becomes now a good deﬁnition to say: Psychic phenomena are the phenomena of inner perception, physical phenomena those of outer perception.2
In this manner a closer treatment of the two sorts of perceptions leads,
not merely to a descriptive, epistemologically important characterization of
these perceptions themselves, but also to a fundamental, descriptive division
of phenomena into two classes, the physical and the psychical. And we seem
to have achieved, for psychological and scientiﬁc purposes, a metaphysically
uncommitted deﬁnition, not oriented towards supposed data in some transcendent world, but to what is truly given phenomenally.
Physical phenomena are no longer deﬁned as the phenomena which arise
out of the operation of bodies on our minds through our sense-organs,
psychic phenomena as the phenomena discovered by us in perceiving the
activities of our minds. In both cases the descriptive character of the phenomena, as experienced by us, alone furnishes our criterion. Psychology can
now be deﬁned as the science of psychic phenomena, as natural science is of
physical phenomena.
These deﬁnitions require certain limitations in order to correspond truly
to our actual sciences, limitations which point to explanatory metaphysical
hypotheses, whereas the phenomena, as descriptively differentiated, remain
the true starting-points of our treatments, and the objects to be explained.
The deﬁnition of natural science is particularly in need of limiting conditions, for it is not concerned with all physical phenomena, not with the
phenomena of imagination, but only with those which come before senseperception. And, even in their case, it only sets up laws to the extent that
these depend on the physical stimulation of the sense-organs. One might
express the scientiﬁc task of natural science, by saying that natural science
is the science which seeks to explain the sequence of the physical phenomena of normal, pure sensations – sensations uninﬂuenced by peculiar
psychical conditions and events – by assuming the action on our senseorgans of a world extended in three space-like dimensions, and taking
place in one time-like dimension. Without settling the absolute character
of this world, it is satisﬁed to attribute to it powers provocative of our
sensations and inﬂuencing each other in their operation, and to set up
laws of coexistence and succession for such powers. In stating these, it
indirectly states the laws of sequence of the physical phenomena of our
sensations, laws conceived in their purity, in scientiﬁc abstraction from

Appendix 395

concomitant mental conditions, as things taking place for an invariant
sensibility. The expression ‘science of physical phenomena’ must be interpreted in this rather complicated way, if it is to be equated with the
meaning of ‘natural science’.
(Brentano, Psychologie, 1, pp. 127–128)
In regard to the conceptual demarcation of psychology, it might appear
that the concept of the psychic phenomenon should be widened rather
than narrowed, since the physical phenomena of imagination fall as
entirely in its ﬁeld of reference as do psychic phenomena in the previously deﬁned sense, and since even the physical phenomena appearing
in sensation cannot be disregarded in the doctrine of sensation. But it
is plain that such physical phenomena only enter into descriptions of
the peculiarities of psychic phenomena as the content of the latter. The
same holds of all psychic phenomena which exist only phenomenally. The
true subject-matter of psychology can be regarded as consisting solely
of psychic phenomena in the sense of actual states. It is exclusively
in regard to the latter that we call psychology the science of psychic
phenomena.
(Ibid. pp. 129 f.)

3
The interesting line of thought that I have just expounded represents, as
my longer quotations have made plain, the standpoint of Brentano,3 and
also that of a whole succession of thinkers who are theoretically close to
him. There are further respects, as is well known, in which ‘inner perception’
plays an important role in Brentano’s psychology. I am here only concerned
with his doctrine of inner consciousness. Every psychic phenomenon is
not merely a consciousness, but itself the content of a consciousness; we are
conscious of it in the narrower sense of perceiving it. The ﬂux of inner
experience is therefore also a continuous ﬂux of inner percepts, which are
most intimately united with the psychic experiences in question. For inner
perception is no second, independent act supervening upon a relevant
psychic phenomenon; the latter rather involves, in addition to its relation to
a primary object, e.g. an externally perceived content, ‘itself in all its completeness as presented and known’ (ibid. p. 182). In so far as the act directly
intends its primary object, it is also subsidiarily directed upon itself. In this
way one avoids the endless complication seemingly threatened by the consciousness which accompanies all psychic phenomena (since their multiple
division into three ‘ground-classes’ itself involves an inner perception). The
‘evidence’ and infallibility of inner perception will also be rendered possible
in this manner (ibid. II, ch. 3, pp. 182 ff.). Brentano is here, in one of his
main views, i.e. in his interpretation of consciousness as a continuous stream

396 Elements of a phenomenological eludication of knowledge

of internal perception, in harmony with the great thinkers of the past. Even
Locke, a true student of experience, deﬁnes consciousness as the perception
of what goes on in a man’s own mind.4
Brentano’s theories have aroused much opposition. This has not only
been directed to the doctrines of inner perception just mentioned, whose
subtly constructed complexity still certainly requires a phenomenological
foundation, but also against his distinction between perceptions and phenomena and, in particular, against the laying down of the tasks of psychology
and natural science which is based upon this.5 The relevant questions have
repeatedly been made the theme of serious discussion in the past decade,
and it is sad that, despite its fundamental importance for psychology and
epistemology, agreement has not been reached.
Criticism, it would appear, has not penetrated far enough, to hit upon the
decisive points, and to separate what is indubitably signiﬁcant in Brentano’s
thought-motivation from what is erroneous in its elaboration. This is due to
the fact that the fundamental psychological and epistemological questions
which cause controversy in these dimensions of enquiry, have not been
sufﬁciently clariﬁed, a natural consequence of defective phenomenological
analysis. On both sides the conception with which men operated remained
ambiguous, on both sides there was a consequent falling into delusive confusions. This will be clear from the following criticism of the illuminating
views of Brentano.

4
According to Brentano inner perception distinguishes itself from outer
perception:
1. by its evidence and its incorrigibility, and
2. by essential differences in phenomena. In inner perception we experience
exclusively psychic phenomena, in outer perception physical phenomena.
This exact parallelism makes it possible for the ﬁrst-named distinction to
serve as a characteristic distinguishing mark of the perceivable phenomena
as well.
As opposed to this, inner and outer perception seem to me, if the terms are
naturally interpreted, to be of an entirely similar epistemological character.
More explicitly: there is a well-justiﬁed distinction between evident and nonevident, or between infallible and fallible perception. But, if one understands
by outer perception (as one naturally does, and as Brentano also does) the
perception of physical things, properties, events etc., and classes all other
perceptions as inner perceptions, then such a division will not coincide at all
with the division previously given. For not every perception of the ego, nor
every perception of a psychic state referred to the ego, is certainly evident,
if by the ‘ego’ we mean what we all mean by it, and what we all think we
perceive in perceiving ourselves, i.e. our own empirical personality. It is

Appendix 397

clear, too, that most perceptions of psychic states cannot be evident, since
these are perceived with a bodily location. That anxiety tightens my throat,
that pain bores into my tooth, that grief gnaws at my heart: I perceive these
things as I perceive that the wind shakes the trees, or that this box is square
and brown in colour, etc. Here, indeed, outer perceptions go with inner
perceptions, but this does not affect the fact that the psychic phenomena
perceived are, as they are perceived, non-existent. Surely it is clear that
psychic phenomena, also, can be perceived transcendently? Exactly regarded,
all psychic phenomena seen in natural or empirical-scientiﬁc attitudes are
perceived transcendently. The pure presentedness of experience presupposes a purely phenomenological attitude which will inhibit all transcendent
assertions.
I know what will here be objected: that we have forgotten the difference
between perception and apperception. Inner perception means the directlyconscious living-through of mental acts, they are here taken as what they
are, and not as what they are apprehended or apperceived as. One must,
however, reﬂect that what is true for the case of inner perception must be
true also for the case of outer perception. If the essence of perception does
not lie in apperception, then all talk of perception in regard to external
things, mountains, woods, houses etc., is misguided, and this, the normal
sense of the word ‘perception’, surely illustrated in these cases above all
others, must be abandoned. Outer perception is apperception, and the unity
of the concept demands that inner perception should be so too. It is of
the essence of perception that something should appear in it: apperception,
however, constitutes what we call appearance, whether veridical or not, and
whether it remains faithfully and adequately in the frame of the immediately
given, or anticipates future perception in going beyond it. The house appears
to me – in no other manner than that I apperceive actually experienced
sense-contents in a certain fashion. I hear a barrel organ – the tones sensed
are interpreted as those of a barrel organ. In the same way I apperceivingly
perceive my own psychic phenomena, the blessedness quivering through
‘me’, the grief in my heart etc. They are called ‘appearances’, or rather
apparent contents, being contents of apperception.

5
The term ‘appearance’ is, of course, beset with ambiguities, whose extreme
dangers are seen precisely in this case. It will not be useless at this point to
list these equivocations explicitly: we have already touched on them in passing in the text of these Investigations. Talk of ‘appearance’ has a preferred
application to acts of intuitive presentation, to acts of perception, on the one
hand, and to acts of representation, on the other, e.g. acts of remembering,
imagining, or pictorially representing (in the ordinary sense), on a basis
mixed with perception. ‘Appearance’ accordingly means:

398 Elements of a phenomenological eludication of knowledge

1. The concrete intuitive experience (the intuitive presentedness or representedness of a given object for us); the concrete experience, e.g., when
we perceive the lamp standing before us. Since the qualitative character of
the act, whether the object is regarded as real or not, is irrelevant, it can also
be ignored entirely, and ‘appearance’ then coincides with what we deﬁned as
‘representation’ in the last Investigation (cf. , §26).
2. The intuited (appearing) object, taken as it appears here and now, e.g.
this lamp as it counts for some percept we have just performed.
3. In misleading fashion we also call the real (reellen) constituents of appearances in sense 1, i.e. those of the concrete acts of appearing or intuiting,
‘appearances’. Such appearances are, above all, the presentative sensations,
the experienced moments of colour, form etc., which we fail to distinguish
from apparent properties of the (coloured, formed) objects corresponding
to them, and apparent in the act which ‘interprets’ them. That it is important to distinguish between them, that it does not do to confuse a coloursensation with an apparent bodily colouring, the sensation of form with
bodily form etc., we have often stressed. Uncritical theories certainly ignore
the distinction. But even those who would refuse to say with Schopenhauer
that ‘the world is my idea’, are accustomed to speak as if apparent things
were compounded out of sense-contents. One could certainly say that
apparent things as such, the mere things of sense, are composed of a stuff
analogous to that which as sensation is counted a content of consciousness. This does not affect the fact that the thing’s apparent properties are
not themselves sensations, but only appear as analogues of sensations. For
they are not present, as sensations are, in consciousness, but are merely
represented in it, as properties which appear in it, which are transcendently referred to. For this reason perceived external things, likewise, are not
complexes of sensations: they are rather objects of appearances, objects
appearing as complexes of properties, whose types stand in a peculiar analogy to types found among sensations. We could put what we have just
said somewhat differently. Under the rubric of ‘sensations’, we range certain sorts of experiences of this or that actual kind belonging to a unity
of consciousness. If it now happens that, in a unity of consciousness, real
properties of analogous kinds appear as external to, and transcending such
sensations, we may then call them after these sensational classes, but they
are no longer sensations. We emphasize the word ‘external’, which must
of course not be understood spatially. However we may decide the question of the existence or nonexistence of phenomenal external things, we
cannot doubt that the reality of each such perceived thing cannot be understood as the reality of a perceived complex of sensations in a perceiving
consciousness. For it is plain, and conﬁrmable by phenomenological analysis in each instance, that the thing of perception, this so-called sensational complex, differs in every circumstance, both as a whole and in every

Appendix 399

distinct moment of property, from the sensational complex actually lived
through in the percept in question, whose objective apperception ﬁrst constitutes the perceptual sense, and thereby the apparent thing, in intentional
fashion.
It may indeed be said that the original concept of appearance was the one
given in our second place above: the concept of what appears, or of what
could appear, of the intuitive as such. Having regard to the fact that all sorts
of experiences (including the experiences of outer intuition, whose objects
are therefore called outer appearances) can be made objects of reﬂective,
inner intuition, we call all experiences in an ego’s experiential unity ‘phenomena’. Phenomenology is accordingly the theory of experiences in general, inclusive of all matters, whether real (reellen) or intentional, given in
experiences, and evidently discoverable in them. Pure phenomenology is
accordingly the theory of the essences of ‘pure phenomena’, the phenomena
of a ‘pure consciousness’ or of a ‘pure ego’: it does not build on the ground,
given by transcendent apperception, of physical and animal, and so of
psycho-physical nature, it makes no empirical assertions, it propounds no
judgements which relate to objects transcending consciousness: it establishes
no truths concerning natural realities, whether physical or psychic – no
psychological truths, therefore, in the historical sense – and borrows no
such truths as assumed premisses. It rather takes all apperceptions and
judgemental assertions which point beyond what is given in adequate, purely
immanent intuition, which point beyond the pure stream of consciousness,
and treats them purely as the experiences they are in themselves: it subjects
them to a purely immanent, purely descriptive examination into essence.
This examination of essence is also pure in a second sense, in the sense of
Ideation; it is an a priori examination in the true sense. So understood, all
the Investigations of the present work have been purely phenomenological,
in so far, that is, as they did not have ontological themes, and did not, as in
the Third and Sixth Investigation, seek to make a priori assertions regarding
the objects of possible consciousness. They did not speak of psychological
facts and laws in an ‘objective’ nature, only of pure possibilities and necessities, which belong to any form of the pure ‘cogito’: they spoke of these as
regards their real (reellen) and their intentional contents, or as regards their
a priori possibilities of connection with other such patterns in an ideally
possible conscious context.
As the term ‘appearance’ is ambiguous, so also, and consequently, is the
term ‘perception’, and so are all further terms used in connection with perception. These ambiguities ﬁll theories of perception with confused errors.
The ‘perceived’ is, e.g., what appears in perception, i.e. its object (the house)
and, further, the sense-content experienced in it, i.e. the sum of the presenting contents, which in their interconnection are ‘interpreted’ as the house,
and singly ‘interpreted’ as its properties.

400 Elements of a phenomenological eludication of knowledge

5a
Excerpt from the First Edition which was replaced by the ﬁrst two paragraphs of the third note in the preceding §5 in Edition II.
3. If we are only clear that we have to draw a distinction in our
intuition between sensations as lived experiences, which are accordingly
components of the subject, and phenomenal determinations, as components of the intentional object, and that both only coincide in the ideal
case of adequate intuition (which does not come into question for us),
then we readily see that our inwoven sensations cannot themselves count
as appearances, whether in the sense of acts or of apparent objects. Not
in the former, since under the rubric of sensations we sum up certain
non-acts, which perhaps receive an objectifying interpretation in acts;
not in the latter, since acts would have to be part of the phenomenal
objectivity of sensations, acts which would have to direct their intention to them. Such acts are indeed possible, but that they are part of
the stock-in-trade of every percept, and this in relation to the percept’s
presentative sensations, cannot be shown to be necessary either by
descriptive analysis or on genetic grounds. All this goes without saying
for imaginative intuitions as well, in relation to their imaginatively representative contents.
If one has once got to the point of regarding all components of
appearances in sense 1 as themselves appearances, then it is a further,
almost unconscious step to regard everything psychic, all lived experiences in the experiential unity of the ego, as phenomena.

6
How misleading such ambiguities show themselves to be appears in
Brentano’s theory, with its division into inner and outer perception according to evidential character and separate phenomenal class. We are told that:
Outer perception is not evident, and is even delusive. This is undoubtedly
the case if we mean by the ‘physical phenomena’ what such perception
perceives, physical things, their properties and changes etc. But when
Brentano exchanges this authentic, and alone permissible sense of the word
‘perceive’, for an improper sense which relates, not to external objects, but
to presenting contents, contents, i.e., present as real parts (reell angehörigen)
in perception, and when he consequently gives the name of ‘physical phenomena’, not merely to outer objects, but also to these contents, these latter
seem infected with the fallibility of outer perception. I believe that stricter
divisions are necessary here. If an external object (a house) is perceived,
presenting sensations are experienced in this perception, but they are not
perceived. When we are deluded regarding the existence of the house, we
are not deluded regarding the existence of our experienced sense-contents,

Appendix 401

since we do not pass judgement on them at all, do not perceive them in this
perception. If we afterwards take note of these contents – our ability to do
this is, within certain limits, undeniable – and if we abstract from all that we
recently or usually meant by way of them, and take them simply as they are,
then we certainly perceive them, but perceive no external object through them.
This new perception has plainly the same claim to inerrancy and evidence as
any ‘inner’ perception. To doubt what is immanent (in consciousness), and
is meant precisely as it is, would be quite evidently irrational. I may doubt
whether an outer object exists, and so whether a percept relating to such
objects is correct, but I cannot doubt the now experienced sensuous content
of my experience, whenever, that is, I reﬂect on the latter, and simply intuit
it as being what it is. There are, therefore, evident percepts of ‘physical’
contents, as well as of ‘psychical’.
If it were now objected that sensuous contents are invariably and necessarily interpreted objectively, that they are always bearers of outer intuitions,
and can only be attended to as contents of such intuitions, the point need
not be disputed: it would make no difference to the situation. The evidence
of the existence of these contents would be as indisputable as before, and
would also not be our evidence for ‘psychic phenomena’ in the sense of acts.
The evidence for the being of the whole psychic phenomenon implies that
for each of its parts, but the perception of the part is a new perception with
a new evidence, which is by no means that of the whole phenomenon.
An analogous ambiguity to that which affects the notion of a physical
phenomenon, will also be found, if our conception is consistent, in the case
of the notion of the psychic phenomenon. This is not the case for Brentano.
He understands by a psychic phenomenon only an actually present actexperience, and by an inner perception a perception which simply apprehends such an experience, just as it is there. Brentano ignores the fact that
he has only done justice to one class of percepts of psychic phenomena
under the name of ‘inner perception’, and that it is not possible to divide all
percepts into the two groups of outer and inner. He also ignores the fact
that the whole evidential prerogative accorded to his ‘inner perception’ hangs
upon the fact that he has employed an essentially distorted concept of perception in the case of inner perception, and that it does not depend on the
peculiarity of inwardly perceived ‘phenomena’. Had he treated as genuine
percepts of physical phenomena only such objective interpretations and
apprehensions as survey their objects adequately, he could have attributed
evidence to that perception of sense-experiences which was by him assigned
to outer perception, and he could not have said of inner perception (in his
sense) that it is ‘really the only sort of perception in the true sense of the
word’ (ibid. p. 119).
It is absolutely clear that the conceptual pairs of inner and outer, and of
evident and non-evident perception, need not coincide at all. The ﬁrst pair
is determined by the concepts of physical and psychical, however these may

402 Elements of a phenomenological eludication of knowledge

be demarcated; the second expresses the epistemologically fundamental antithesis studied in our Sixth Investigation, the opposition between adequate
perception (or intuition in the narrowest sense, whose perceptual intention
is exclusively directed to a content truly present to it) and the merely supposing, inadequate perception, whose intention does not ﬁnd fulﬁlment in
present content, but rather goes through this to constitute the lively, but
always one-sided and presumptive, presentedness of what is transcendent.
In the ﬁrst case the experienced content is also the object of perception, in
the second, content and object fall asunder. The content represents what it
does not itself have, what is, however, made manifest in it, and what is, in a
certain sense, its analogue (if we conﬁne ourselves to what is immediately
intuited), as body-colour is an analogue of sense-colour.
In this separation we have the essence of the epistemological difference
that men look for between inner and outer perception. It is the operative
factor in the Cartesian treatment of doubt. I can doubt the truth of an
inadequate, merely projective perception: the intended, or, if one likes, intentional, object is not immanent in the act of appearing. The intention
is there, but the object itself, that is destined ﬁnally to fulﬁl it, is not one
with it. How could its existence be evident to me? But I cannot doubt an
adequate, purely immanent perception, since there are no residual intentions
in it that must yet achieve fulﬁlment. The whole intention, or the intention
in all its aspects, is fulﬁlled. Or, as we also expressed it: the object is not in
our percept merely believed to exist, but is also itself truly given, and as
what it is believed to be. It is of the essence of adequate perception that the
intuited object itself really and truly dwells in it, which is merely another
way of saying that only the perception of one’s own actual experiences is
indubitable and evident. Not every such percept is evident. In the percept of
toothache, e.g., a real experience is perceived, and yet our perception often
deceives: the pain appears to bore a sound tooth. The possibility of our
error is plain. The perceived object is not the pain as experienced, but the
pain in a transcendent reference as connected with the tooth. Adequate
perception involves, however, that in it the perceived is experienced as it is
perceived (as the perception thinks or conceives it). In this sense we obviously only have an adequate percept of our own experiences, and of these only
to the extent that we apprehend them purely, without going apperceptively
beyond them.

7
It might now be objected: An experience is surely the same as a psychic
phenomenon. What, then, is the dispute all about? I answer: If one means
by ‘psychic phenomena’ the real (realen) constituents of our consciousness, the experiences themselves that are there, and if one further means by
inner percepts, or percepts of psychic phenomena, adequate percepts, whose

Appendix 403

intention ﬁnds immanent fulﬁlment in the experiences in question, then
the scope of inner perception will of course coincide with that of adequate
perception. It is important, however, to note:
1. That psychic phenomena in this sense are not the same as psychic
phenomena in Brentano’s sense, nor as Descartes’s cogitationes, nor as
Locke’s acts or operations of mind, since in the sphere of experiences as such
all sense-contents, all sensations, also belong.
2. That the non-inner perceptions (the remainder class) will not then coincide with outer perceptions in the ordinary sense of the word, but with the
much wider class of transcendent, inadequate perceptions. If a sense-content,
or sense-complex or sequence of sense-contents is apprehended as a thing
out there, as a multitude, an articulated connection of several things, or as a
change in things, an external happening etc., we have an outer percept in the
ordinary sense. But a non-sensuous content can also belong to the representative stuff of a transcendent percept, particularly in association with
sense-contents. Our perceived object can then as readily be an external object with perceived mental properties (this happens in differing fashion in the
apprehension of one’s own and other men’s bodily being as ‘persons’) or, as
in psycho-physical apperception, an inner object, a subjective experience,
perceived with physical properties attaching to it.
3. When in psychology, as the objective science of animal mentality,
we mean by perceptions of psychic phenomena the perceptions that a man
has of his own experiences, which the perceiver apprehends as belonging
to himself, this particular person, all inner perceptions are no less cases of
transcendent apperception than are outer perceptions. Among these there
are some which (with some abstraction) count as adequate, in so far as they
seize the man’s own (relevant) experiences in their very selves. But in so far
as even such ‘adequate’ inner perceptions apperceive the experiences they
apprehend as those of a percipient, psycho-physical, personal ego, and so as
belonging to the presented objective world, they are in this respect infected
with an essential inadequacy. There are, further, cases of inner perception,
as there are cases of outer perception, where the perceived object, in the
sense given to it in our percept, has no existence. The distinction, fundamental even for psychology, between adequate and inadequate perception –
psychological adequateness being understood as the abstraction we mentioned
– intersects the distinction between inner and outer perception, and therefore
pervades the sphere of the former.

8
The ambiguities of the word ‘phenomenon’ allow us ﬁrst to call apparent
objects and their properties ‘phenomena’, then to apply the term to the
experiences which constitute their act of appearing (particularly to the experienced contents in the sense of sensations) and, lastly, to all experiences

404 Elements of a phenomenological eludication of knowledge

whatever. These ambiguities explain why we tend to confuse two essentially
different types of psychological division of ‘phenomena’.
1. Divisions of experiences, e.g. the division of experiences into acts and
non-acts. Such divisions naturally fall into the sphere of psychology, which
accordingly has to deal with all experiences, which it of course apperceives
in transcendent fashion as experiences of animal beings in nature.
2. The division of phenomenal objects into, e.g., such as seem to belong to
the consciousness of an ego and such as do not seem to do so, i.e. the division
into psychical and physical objects (contents, properties, relations etc.).
In Brentano these two divisions are confused. He simply opposes physical to psychical phenomena, and deﬁnes them unmistakably as a division
of experiences into acts and non-acts. But he at once mixes up, under the
rubric of physical phenomena the contents of sense,6 and apparent external
objects (or their phenomenal properties), so that the division now becomes a
division of phenomenal objects into physical and psychical (in an ordinary
or near-ordinary sense), in which the latter division furnishes the names.
Closely connected with this confusion is the erroneous criterion, also used
by Brentano, to divide the two classes of phenomena: that physical phenomena only exist ‘phenomenally and intentionally, while psychical phenomena
also ‘have an actual existence as well as an intentional one’.7 If we understand by ‘physical phenomena’ phenomenal things, it is at least sure that
they do not need to exist. The forms of productive fancy, most of the objects
of artistic representation in paintings, statues, poems etc., hallucinatory and
illusory objects, exist only in a phenomenal and intentional manner, i.e. they
do not exist in the authentic sense at all; only the relevant acts of appearing
exist with their real (reellen) and intentional contents. The matter is quite
different in the case of physical phenomena interpreted as sensed contents.
The sensed (experienced) colour-contents, shape-contents etc., which we
enjoy when we look at Böcklin’s picture of the Elysian Fields, and which,
informed by an imaginative act-character, are made into the consciousness
of the pictured objects, are real (reelle) constituents of this experience. And
they do not exist in merely phenomenal, intentional fashion (as apparent,
merely intended contents) but in actuality. One must not forget, of course,
that ‘actual’ does not here mean the same as ‘external to consciousness’, but
the same as ‘not merely putative’.

Notes 405

Notes

Prolegomena to pure logic
1 Logic as a normative and, in particular, as a practical
discipline
1 Bergmann, Die Grundlagen der Logik (1895), p. 78. Cf. also Bolzano’s
Wissenschaftslehre (Sulzbach 1837), 1, p. 24: ‘Is the question whether coriander
helps to strengthen memory a logical question? It surely should be if logic is an
ars rationis formandae in the complete meaning of the words’.
2 Bolzano, Wissenschaftslehre, 1, p. 7. The fourth volume of the Wissenschaftslehre
is indeed specially devoted to the task which the deﬁnition expresses. But it
strikes one as strange that the incomparably more important disciplines which
the ﬁrst three volumes treat of, should be represented merely as aids to a technology of scientiﬁc textbooks. Naturally, too, the value of this by no means as yet
sufﬁciently valued work, which is, in fact, almost unused, rests on the researches
of these earlier volumes.
3 Psychologism, its arguments and its attitude to the usual
counter-arguments
1 I use the expressions ‘psychologist’, ‘psychologism’ and so on without any evaluative ‘colouring’, similar to Stumpf in his Psychology and Theory of Knowledge.
2 ‘Logic is a psychological discipline just as surely as knowing only arises in the
mind, and as thinking which terminates in knowledge is a mental happening.’
Lipps, op. cit.
3 Cf., e.g. W. Hamilton’s Lectures , p. 78, Drobisch, Neue Darstellung der Logik,
ed. , §2; cf. also B. Erdmann, Logik , p. 18.
4 Logik, vol. , p. 10. Sigwart’s own way of treating logic (as we shall see in Ch. )
is altogether on psychologistic lines.
5 This point of view is expressed with increasing clearness in the works of Mill,
Sigwart, Wundt, and Höﬂer-Meinong. Cf. on this the quotations and criticisms
in Ch. , §49 f.
6 Cf. Lotze’s Logik, ed. , §332, pp. 543–4; Natorp ‘Über objektive und subjektive
Begründungen der Erkenntnis’, Philos. Monatshefte , p. 264; Erdmann’s Logik,
vol. , p. 18. As against this cf. Stumpf ‘Psychologie und Erkenntnistheorie’, p. 5
(Proceedings of Kais. Bay. Akad. d. Wiss.,  Kl., vol. , Section , p. 469). That
Stumpf is discussing epistemology, not logic, obviously makes no essential difference.

406 Notes
4 Empiricistic consequences of psychologism
1 I mean by these the senses of the propositions ‘A and B’, i.e. both hold, and ‘A or
B’, i.e. one holds – which does not imply that only one holds.
2 Cf. the systematic discussions of Ch.  of this work regarding the scepticalrelativistic absurdity of all conceptions which make logical principles depend on
facts.

7 Psychologism as a sceptical relativism
1 Please note that the term ‘knowledge’ is, in this work, not restricted, as it usually
is restricted, to objects that are real.
2 See Ch. v, Appendix to §§25–6.
3 His view should recommend itself to those who think to separate subjective from
objective truths by denying an objective character to judgements of introspection.
They assume that the being-for-me of a conscious content cannot at the same
time be a being-in-itself, that subjectivity in the psychological sense excludes
objectivity in the logical sense.

8 The psychologistic prejudices
1 A mark of a mark is, generally speaking, plainly not a mark of the thing. If the
principle meant what it literally says, we could infer: This blotting-paper is red,
Red is a colour, therefore this blotting-paper is a colour.
2 In this view, that the normative notion of ‘ought’ does not form part of the content
of logical laws, I am glad to ﬁnd myself in agreement with Natorp, who has recently made the brief and clear remark in his Sozialpädagogik (Stuttgart, 1899), §4,
that ‘logical principles, we maintain, are as little about what people actually think
in such and such circumstances, as they are about what they ought to think’. He
says of the equational reasonings ‘If A = B and B = C, A = C’ that ‘I perceive its
truth when only the terms to be compared, and the relations given together with
them, are before me, without having to think in the least of the actual or proper
conduct of some corresponding act of thought’ (pp. 20–1). There are certain other
equally important rapprochements between these Prolegomena and the distinguished
thinker’s present work, which unhappily came too late to assist in forming and
expounding these thoughts. Two previous writings of Natorp, the above quoted
article from Phil. Monatshefte,  and the Einleitung in die Psychologie, stimulated me, however – though other points in them provoked me to controversion.
3 ‘Pure’ or ‘formal’ mathematics, as I use the term, includes all pure arithmetic and
theory of manifolds, but not geometry. Geometry corresponds in pure mathematics to the theory of a three-dimensional Euclidean manifold. This manifold
is the generic Idea of space, but not space itself.
4 See in addition the ﬁne statement of Natorp ‘Über objektive und subjektive
Begründung der Erkenntnis’, Philos. Monatshefte, , p. 265 f. Cf. also G.
Frege’s stimulating work Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (1884), p. vi f. (I need
hardly say that I no longer approve of my own fundamental criticisms of Frege’s
antipsychologistic position set forth in my Philosophie der Arithmetik, , pp. 129–
32.) I may here take the opportunity, in relation to all of the discussions of these
Prolegomena, to refer to the Preface of Frege’s later work Grundgesetze der
Arithmetik, vol.  (Jena, 1893).

Notes 407
5 Wundt, Logik, I, 2nd ed., p. 91. Wundt regularly couples inner evidence with universal validity in this passage. As regards the latter, he distinguishes between a
subjective form of universal validity, a mere consequence of inner evidence, and
an objective form, which also covers the postulate of the intelligibility of experience. But as the justiﬁcation and adequate fulﬁlment of this postulate itself rests
on inner evidence, it does not seem feasible to drag in ‘universal validity’ into
discussions of basic principles.
6 If we really had to interpret the theory of inner evidence in the manner of Höﬂer
on p. 133, op. cit., it would have been corrected by our previous critique of empiricistic misunderstandings of logical principles (see §23). Höﬂer’s statement
‘that an afﬁrmative and a negative judgement about the same object are incompatible’, is, as an exact statement, false, and can even less count as a statement
of the logical principle. A similar mistake slips into the deﬁnition of the correlatives ‘ground’ and ‘consequence’: if it were correct, it would falsify all syllogistic
rules. It runs: ‘A judgement C is the consequence of a ground G, if the belief
in the falsity of C is incompatible with the (imagined) belief in the truth of G’
(op. cit. p. 136). Note that Höﬂer explains incompatibility in terms of evident
non-coexistence (op. cit. p. 129). He plainly confuses the ideal non-coexistence (i.e.
lack of joint truth) of the propositions in question, with the real non-coexistence
of the corresponding acts of afﬁrmation, presentation etc.

10 End of our critical treatments
1 Ueberweg can ﬁnd as much to mention about both of them: their titles. Some
day men will regard an historical treatment of logic, oriented, like Ueberweg’s, to
the ‘great philosophy’, an extraordinary anomaly.

11 The idea of pure logic
1 Cf. §6. We were there no doubt concerned under the rubric of ‘science’, with a
narrower concept, that of theoretical explanatory abstract science. This, however, makes no essential difference, especially in view of the eminent position of
the abstract sciences, that we shall be discussing immediately below.
2 We are therefore not concerned with a subjective psychological character of the
judgement in question, e.g. a feeling of necessitation, etc. How ideal objects, and
with them ideal predicates of such objects, stand to our subjective acts has been
more or less indicated in §39 (excised from this edition). More in the following
Investigations.
3 Cf. above §32. Above, when I pinned down the pointed notion of scepticism,
there was no place for so subtle a distinction, and I merely opposed the noetic
conditions of theoretical knowledge to the objectively logical conditions of theory
itself. But here, where all relevant relationships must be brought to complete
clearness, it seems proper to treat the logical conditions, in the ﬁrst place, as
being conditions of knowledge as well, and then only to give them a direct relation to objective theory itself. This of course has no effect on anything essential to
our conception, which rather achieves a clearer unfolding. The like holds in
regard to the inclusion in our scope of the empirical, subjective conditions of
knowledge together with the noetic, purely logical ones. We are proﬁted in all
this by our treatment of logical self-evidence: see above, §50. Self-evidence is
indeed nothing other than the character of knowledge as such.

408 Notes

Investigations into phenomenology and the theory of
knowledge
Introduction
1 Logic, Book , ch. , §1.
2 See the ﬁnal chapter of the Prolegomena, §§66–7 in particular.
3 Cf. §11 of Investigation .

Investigation I: Expression and meaning
1 Essential distinctions
1 I often make use of the vaguer expression ‘objective correlate’ (Gegenständlichkeit,
‘objectivity’) since we are here never limited to objects in the narrower sense, but
have also to do with states of affairs, properties, and non-independent forms etc.,
whether real or categorial.
2 Cf. with this Twardowski’s assumption of a ‘presentative activity moving in two
directions’ in his work Zur Lehre vom Ihbalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen
(Vienna 1894), p. 14.
3 G. Frege, Über Sinn und Bedeutung, Zeitschr. f. Philos. u. philos. Kritik, vol. 100, p. 25.
4 Die Impersonalien, p. 62.
5 B. Erdmann, Logik, I, p. 233.
6 A. Marty, ‘Über subjektlose Sätze und das Verhältnis der Grammatik zur Logik
und Psychologie’, Art. , Vierteljahrschrift f. wiss. Phil. , 80 f.
7 Ibid. p. 81 note. Cf. Art. , Vol. , p. 464.
3 Fluctuation in meaning and the ideality of unities of meaning
1 Husserl’s example is of the German word Hund meaning both a dog and a truck
used in mines.
2 The restriction to concreta is not essential. Demonstratives, e.g., can also refer to
abstracta.
3 More on this point in Investigation .

Investigation II: The ideal unity of the species and
modern theories of abstraction
1 Universal objects and the consciousness of universality
1 For more detailed treatment of the intuitive apprehensions of collections see my
Philosophie der Arithmetik (1891), ch. , on the intuitive cognition of likeness,
p. 233 in particular.
2 It is not suitable to speak of a theory when, as the following treatments will
show, there is nothing at all to be theoretically treated, i.e. to be explained.
2 The psychological hypostatization of the universal
1 [It would have been possible for Husserl here to have used his other term reellen,
signifying an actual part, not something intended or meant.]

Notes 409
2 As against this see B. Erdmann, Logik, , pp. 81–5, and K. Twardowski, Zur
Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen, p. 106.
3 Abstraction and attention
1 See A. v. Meinong, Hume-Studien, , p. 68.
2 The word symbolized by letter ‘A’ in such combinations, must count as syncategorematic. The expressions: ‘the lion’, ‘a lion’, ‘this lion’ ‘all lions, etc. certainly
and evidently have a common element of meaning, but the word can have no
independent sense except as occurring in one of these forms. If we are asked
whether one of these meanings is not contained in all the reset, whether the direct
idea of the Species corresponding to A does not lie hidden in the other meanings,
we must answer ‘No’. The Species A ‘lies hidden’ in these meanings, but only
potentially and not as a meant object.
3 It is easy to see that as a result of this supposed ‘unconsciousness’ the absurd
χωρισµ, of Locke’s general idea returns. What is not ‘conscious’ cannot be a
differentia of what is conscious. If exclusive attention to the moment of triangularity was possible, in a manner which made the differentiating characters vanish
from consciousness, then the ‘conscious’, intuitive object would be the triangle as
such and no more.
4 Abstraction and representation
1 Cf. also the end of the quotation in §9 of the present Investigation. Among modern
philosophers I may mention Rickert, ‘Zur Theorie der naturwissenschaftlichen
Begriffsbildung’, Vierteljahreschrift für wiss. Philos. .
2 Cf. the Prolegomena to Pure Logic, ch. .

Investigation III: On the theory of wholes and parts
Introduction
1 As regards these ‘formal objective categories’ and the formal ontological truths
of essence pertaining to them, see the statements of the last chapter of the Prolegomena, (1 §§67 f ).
1 The difference between independent and non-independent
objects
1 The two Husserlian terms, real and reell, here occur in the same sentence, the
former connoting what is actually there in the space-time world, and not abstract
or ideal, the latter what is actually immanent in an experience, and not merely
‘meant’ by it. [Translator’s note]
2 In the present discussion, there is no danger of confusion between ‘presented
content’, in the sense of any presented object (in the psychological sphere: any
psychological datum), and ‘presented content’ in the sense of ‘what’ the presentation signiﬁes.
3 Principles, Introduction §10.
4 Almost exactly as formulated by C. Stumpf in Über den psychologischen Ursprung
der Raumvorstellung (1873), p. 109.

410 Notes
5 Stumpf previously used the expression ‘partial content’, but now prefers to speak
of an ‘attributive moment’.
6 In the following expositions, I employed my essay ‘On Abstract and Concrete
Concepts’, (No. I of the ‘Psychological Studies in the Elements of Logic’, Philos.
Monatshefte, 1894, Vol. XXX).
7 Loc. cit. p. 112.
8 Loc. cit. p. 113.
9 Cf. Ehrenfels, ‘Über Gestaltqualitäten’, Vierteljahrsschrift für Wiss. Philosophie
(1890); my Philosophie der Arithmetik (1891), particularly the whole of ch. ,
Meinong, ‘Beiträge Zur Theorie der psychischen Analyse’, Zeitschrift f. Psychologie
u. Physiologie d Sinnesorgane, VI (1893).

2 Thoughts towards a theory of the pure forms of wholes
and parts
1 In the sense namely of the abbreviated mode of speech deﬁned in the last section,
which must everywhere be remembered here.
2 One must certainly distinguish the sensuous moment of likeness from likeness as a
categorial unity: the former is related to the latter as the sensuous characters of
plurality, which serve us as direct indications of multiplicity and diversity, stand
to multiplicity and diversity themselves. See my Phil. der Arithmetik, p. 233. This
ﬁrst work of mine (an elaboration of my Habilitationsschrift, never published
and only partially printed, at the University of Halle, 1887) should be compared
with all assertions of the present work on aggregates, moments of unity, combinations, wholes and objects of higher order. I am sorry that in many recent
treatments of the doctrine of ‘form-qualities’, this work has mostly been ignored,
though quite a lot of the thought-content of later treatments by Cornelius,
Meinong etc., of questions of analysis, apprehension of plurality and combination, is already to be found, differently expressed, in my Philos. der Arithm. I
think it would still be of use today to consult this work on the phenomenological
and ontological issues in question, especially since it is the ﬁrst work which
attached importance to acts and objects of higher order and investigated them
thoroughly.
3 See §11, above.
4 See Prolegomena, Vol. 1 (§§67–72) on the role of formalization for constituting
the idea of a pure logic as mathesis universalis. We must emphasize again that
where we speak simply of ‘abstraction’, as we have done so far, we mean the
emphasis on a non-independent ‘moment’ of content, or the corresponding ideation under the title of ‘ideating abstraction’, but not formalization.
5 See §19, above.
6 Prop. 3 in §19 above.

Investigation IV: The distinction between independent and
non-independent meanings and the idea of pure grammar
Introduction
1 B. Bolzano, Wissenschaftslehre (Sulzbach, 1837), , §57. ‘Presentation’ means
for Bolzano ‘presentations-in-themselves’, which corresponds to our concept of
meaning.

Notes 411
2 A. Marty, ‘Über subjektlose Sätze’, Vierteljahrschrift fur wis. Philos., th year,
p. 293, note.
3 Marty, ‘Über das Verhältnis von Grammatik und Logik’, Symbolae Pragenses
(1893), p. 121, n. 2.
4 In his last-mentioned article Marty deﬁnes a categorematic sign as one which
independently arouses a complete presentation, through which an object is named.
But the deﬁnition of the syncategorematic sign which follows (see above) does
not clearly bring out that the grammatical division rests on an essential division
in the ﬁeld of meaning, as Marty certainly thought.
5 The word ‘presentation’, carefully regarded, does not here mean ‘act of presentation’, but merely what is presented as such, together with the articulations and
forms with which it is present in consciousness. The ‘presentational form’ is
therefore the form of what is presented as such; we must keep this in mind in
what follows.
6 A. Marty recently wrote, in his ‘Untersuchungen zur Grundlegung der allgemeinen
Grammatik und Sprachphilosophie’ (Halle, 1908) of ‘autosemantic’ and ‘synsemantic’ signs (pp. 205 ff.).
7 The mode of speech need not be taken as literally as Marty has done in his Untersuchungen, pp. 211 f., as meaning that we build total meanings out of ‘bricks’ of
partial meaning that could also exist separately. That this is a wrong conception
is precisely the theme of my further argued doctrine of non-independent meanings. I cannot see how the exposition above can bear such an interpretation, and
that it is in any way touched by Marty’s objections. See the further discussions
below regarding the understanding of isolated syncategorematica.
8 In so far as these and the rest have not lost their articulate meanings in the
evolution of speech.
9 We dealt with an analogous, closely related question in §2.
10 §15.
11 The genuine contribution traditional logic makes to pure logic including the
whole logic of the syllogism, is part of the logic of propositional meanings (or
‘apophantic’ logic).

Investigation V: On intentional experiences and
their ‘contents’
1 Consciousness as the phenomenological subsistence of the ego
and consciousness as inner perception
1 See my Ideas towards a Pure Phenomenology, etc., in the Jahrbuch für Philos. u.
phänom. Forschung, 1 (1913), Section 2. [The present paragraph is an insertion in
the Second Edition.]
2 Which is only in question qua phenomenal, since we exclude all questions regarding its existence or non-existence, and that of the empirical ego which appears in
it, if we wish our treatments to have, not a descriptive-psychological, but a purely
phenomenological value. One should note how, up to this point and for the
future, each analysis can be ﬁrst conducted as mere psychology, but there really
permits of that ‘puriﬁcation’ which gives it value as ‘pure’ phenomenology.
[Second Edition comment.]
3 Or what we also call its ‘appearance’ in the sense given above, which will also
be employed in future, the sense in which a (phenomenologically understood)
experience is itself styled an ‘appearance’.

412 Notes
4 In the First Edition the name ‘phenomenological ego’ was given to the stream of
consciousness as such.
5 The opposition to the doctrine of a ‘pure’ ego, already expressed in this paragraph,
is one that the author no longer approves of, as is plain from his Ideas cited above
(see ibid §57, p. 107; §80, p. 159).
6 The text as here set forth is taken over without essential change from the First
Edition. It fails to do justice to the fact that the empirical ego is as much a case
of transcendence as the physical thing. If the elimination of such transcendence,
and the reduction to pure phenomenological data, leaves us with no residual
pure ego, there can be no real (adequate) self-evidence attaching to the ‘I am’.
But if there is really such an adequate self-evidence – who indeed could deny it?
– how can we avoid assuming a pure ego? It is precisely the ego apprehended in
carrying out a self-evident cogito, and the pure carrying out eo epso grasps it
in phenomenological purity, and necessarily grasps it as the subject of a pure
experience of the type cogito.
7 Cf. the whole of §4 in Natorp’s Einleitung in die Psychologie nach kritischer
Methode, pp. 11 f.
8 I have since managed to ﬁnd it, i.e. have learnt not to be led astray from a pure
grasp of the given through corrupt forms of ego-metaphysic cf. note to §6.

2 Consciousness as intentional experience
1 My deviations from Brentano are not on the same lines as the qualiﬁcations that
he found necessary to add to the inadequate simpliﬁcations of which he was
clearly conscious (See Psychologie, , pp. 127 ff.). This will be plain from the
discussions in App. 2 at the end of this volume.
2 We could not say ‘experiencing contents’, since the concept of ‘experience’ has its
prime source in the ﬁeld of ‘psychic acts’. Even if this concept has been widened
to include non-acts, these for us stand connected with, ranged beside and attached to acts, in a unity of consciousness so essential that, were it to fall away,
talk of ‘experiencing’ would lose its point.
3 See further the Appendix referred to above.
4 Psychologie, , 115.
5 We are not therefore troubled by such vexed questions as to whether all mental
phenomena, e.g. the phenomena of feeling, have the peculiarity in question. We
must ask instead whether the phenomena in question are mental phenomena.
The oddness of the question springs from the unsuitability of its wording. More
about this later.
6 Within the framework of psychological apperception, the purely phenomenological
concept of experience fuses with that of mental reality, or rather, it turns into the
concept of the mental state of an animal being (either in actual nature or in an
ideally possible nature with ideally possible animals, i.e. without existential implications). Later on the pure phenomenological generic Idea intentional experience
transforms itself into the parallel, nearly related psychological generic concept.
According as psychological apperception is kept out or kept in, the same sort of
analysis has phenomenological or psychological import.
7 Psychologie, p. 111 (end of §3).
8 Psychologie, p. 104.
9 Cf. Brentano, Psychologie, pp. 266–7, 295 and passim.
10 No reference to selective attention or notice is included in the sense of the ‘reference’ involved in our ‘intention’. See also §13.

Notes 413
11 We may here ignore the various possible assertive traits involved in the believed
being of what is presented. One should again recall that it is possible to leave out
all presupposing of natural reality, persons and other conscious animals included
therein in our completed studies, so that they are understood as discussions of
ideal possibilities. One ﬁnally sees them in the light of methodological exclusions,
which cut out whatever is matter of transcendent apperception and assertion, so
as to bring out what is really part of an experience and of its essence. Experience
has then become the pure experience of phenomenology, from which psychological
apperception has likewise dropped away.
12 As regards the seemingly obvious distinction between immanent and transcendent objects, modelled on the traditional schema of inner conscious image v.
extraconscious being-in-itself, cf. the Appendix at the end of this chapter.
13 Cf. the additional note to ch.  above, and my Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie, l.c.
14 Cf. §19 (excised from this edition).
15 We are in complete agreement with Natorp (Einleitung in die Psychologie, 1st
edn, p. 21) when he objects to fully serious talk about ‘mental activities’, or
‘activities of consciousness’, or ‘activities of the ego’, by saying that ‘consciousness only appears as a doing, and its subject as a doer, because it is often or
always accompanied by conation’. We too reject the ‘mythology of activities’: we
deﬁne ‘acts’ as intentional experiences, not as mental activities.
16 P. Natorp, Einleiltung in die Psychologie, 1st edn, p. 18.
17 Last three sentences added in Edition .
18 Cf. my ‘Psychological Studies . . .’, Philos. Monatshefte XXX (1894), p. 182.
19 The much discussed dispute as to the relation between perceptual and imaginative presentation can have no satisfactory outcome in default of a properly
prepared phenomenological foundation and consequent clarity in concepts and
questions. The like holds of enquiries as to the relation of simple perception to
representational or sign-consciousness. It can be readily shown, I think, that actcharacters differ in such cases in pictorial representation, e.g. an essentially new
mode of intention, is experienced.
20 Psychologie, , pp. 116 ff.
21 [Paragraph added in Edition .]
22 Here as elsewhere I identify the pain-sensation with its ‘content’, since I do not
recognize peculiar sensing acts. Naturally I reject Brentano’s doctrine that presentative acts, in the term of acts of feeling-sensation, underlie acts of feeling.
23 I point here, for purposes of comparison, and perhaps completion, to H. Schwarz’s
Psychologie des Willens (Leipzig, 1900) which in §12 (excised from this edition)
deals with similar questions.
24 In the First Edition I wrote ‘real or phenomenological’ for ‘real’. The word
‘phenomenological’ like the word ‘descriptive’ was used in the First Edition only
in connection with real (reelle) elements of experience, and in the present edition
it has so far been used predominately in this sense. This corresponds to one’s
natural starting with the psychological point of view. It became plainer and plainer,
however, as I reviewed the completed Investigations and pondered on their
themes more deeply – particularly from this point onwards – that the description
of intentional objectivity as such, as we are conscious of it in the concrete actexperience, represents a distinct descriptive dimension where purely intuitive description may be adequately practised, a dimension opposed to that of real (reellen)
act-constituents, but which also deserves to be called ‘phenomenological’. These
methodological extensions lead to important extensions of the ﬁeld of problems
now opening before us and considerable improvements due to a fully conscious
separation of descriptive levels. Cf. my Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie,
Book , and particularly what is said of Noesis and Noema in Section .

414 Notes
25 Paragraph added in the Second Edition.
26 Real would sound much better alongside ‘intentional’ but it deﬁnitely keeps the
notion of thinglike transcendence which the reduction to real (reell ) immanence
in experience is meant to exclude. It is well to maintain a conscious association of
the real with the thinglike.
27 We have here a case of ‘foundation’ in the strict sense of our Third Investigation.
We only use the term in this strict sense.
28 Cf. the Appendix to this chapter.
29 Confusion results from unavoidable ambiguities in talk of the deﬁnite and the
indeﬁnite. One speaks, e.g., of the indeﬁniteness of perceptual judgements, which
consists in the fact that the rear side of a perceived object is subsidiarily meant,
but indeﬁnitely, whereas the clearly seen front side seems deﬁnite. Or one speaks
of the indeﬁniteness of ‘particular’ assertions, e.g. An A is B, Some A’s are B’s, as
opposed to the deﬁniteness of the singular assertion ‘This A is B’. Such deﬁnitenesses and indeﬁnitenesses differ in sense from those in the text: they belong
among the particularities of possible ‘matters’, as will be plainer in what follows.
30 One constantly notices that all the empirical psychological aspects of the examples
fall out and become irrelevant with the ideational grasp of the phenomenological
difference of essence.
31 Cf. §17 (excised from this edition).
32 For the moment we permit ourselves this improper mode of expression, which in
its proper interpretation assorts ill with the image-theory.
33 Which does not mean, we must repeat, that the object is noticed, or that we are
thematically occupied with it, though such things are included in our ordinary
talk about ‘referring’.

3 The matter of the act and its underlying presentation
1 At the time, of course, of the appearance of this work’s First Edition.

5 Further contributions to the theory of judgement.
‘Presentation’ as a qualitatively unitary genus of nominal and
propositional acts
1
2
3
4

Cf. the examples in §34 (excised from this edition).
It must be noted that this mode of expression is a circumlocution.
[§38, from this point onwards, is mainly a Second Edition supplement.]
All this must of course not be understood in an empirical-psychological manner.
We are concerned here (as everywhere in this investigation) with a priori possibilities rooted in pure essence, which are as such grasped by us with apodictic
self-evidence.
5 Cf. however the interpretation of a ‘community of kind’ as a peculiar relation of
‘essence and counter-essence’ in my Ideas, p. 233. The further pursuit of the
results of this investigation has generally led to many essential deepenings
and improvements. Cf. in particular, Ideas, §§109–14, 117 on the neutrality
modiﬁcation.
6 The same is of course true of other act-products, e.g. the aesthetic consideration
of pictures.
7 §23.

Notes 415
6 Summing-up of the most important ambiguities in the terms
‘presentation’ and ‘content’
1 Not a good example of the impossible, but a slip. Translator.
2 See the criticism of the picture-theory in §21, Appendix to §11 and §20 (p. 238 of
this book).
3 Cf. Inv. , §20 (excised from this edition). Also Inv. , §20 (excised from this
edition), and the chapter on ‘Abstraction and Representation’.
4 Reell applies to a thing’s actual parts as opposed to what it merely intends or
means. Real is the being of real things in the world. [Translator]

Investigation VI: Elements of a phenomenological elucidation
of knowledge
First Section: Objectifying intentions and their fulfilments:
knowledge as a synthesis of fulfilment and its gradations
1 Meaning-intention and meaning-fulfilment
Log. Inv. , §12.
See Log. Inv. , §26.
Log. Inv. , §§9, 10.
Cf. my Psych. Studies of elementary Logic, , ‘Concerning Intuitions and Representations’, Philos. Monatshefte, 1894, p. 176. I have given up the concept of
intuition supported there, as the present work makes plain.
5 I use this expression without specially introducing it as a term, since it is the
mere translation of ‘meaning’. I shall accordingly often speak of signiﬁcative or
signitive acts, instead of acts of meaning-intention, of meaning etc. ‘Meaningacts’ can scarcely be talked of, since expressions are used as the normal subjects
of meaning. ‘Signitive’ also offers us a suitable terminological opposite to ‘intuitive’. A synonym for ‘signitive’ is ‘symbolic’, to the extent that the modern
abuse of a word ‘symbol’ obtains – an abuse already denounced by Kant – which
equates a symbol with a ‘sign’, quite against its original and still indispensable
sense.
6 Cf. §13 of the previous Investigation.
1
2
3
4

3 The phenomenology of the levels of knowledge
1 See above §14.
2 Cf. the deeper analyses of §24.
3 In the above paragraph, the German terms ‘darstellen’, ‘Darstellung’ etc. are
translated by ‘intuitively present’, ‘intuitive presentation’ etc. The terms ‘strictly
present’ etc. are used to translate ‘präsentieren’ etc. ‘Presentation’ simpliciter still
translates ‘Vorstellung’. [Translator]
5 The ideal of adequation. Self-evidence and truth
1 Cf. §23.

416 Notes

Second Section: Sense and understanding
7 A study in categorial representation
1 If a represents the constitutive features in a concept and b those of any other
concept whatever, one can always construct the form: Something that is either a
or b. This external sort of conceptual extension which I call ‘disjunctive’, can at
times prove very useful. It plays, e.g., an important role in the development of
artiﬁcial mathematical techniques not sufﬁciently appreciated by logicians. The
logic of mathematics is in fact in its infancy: few logicians have even seen that
here is a ﬁeld of great problems, fundamental for the understanding of mathematics and of mathematicizing natural science, and admitting of strict solution
despite all their difﬁculty.
Appendix: External and internal perception: physical and
psychical phenomena
1 It is remarkable that no one has tried to found a positive determination of
‘physical phenomena’ on these intuitive interconnections. In pointing to them,
I depart from my role as a reporter. To employ them seriously, one must, of
course, have due regard to the ambiguity of talk about ‘physical phenomena’, an
ambiguity we shall immediately discuss.
2 Brentano (Psychologie, , pp. 118 f.) says it is a distinguishing mark of all psychic
phenomena ‘that they are only perceived in an inner consciousness, whereas outer
perception alone is possible in the case of physical phenomena’. It is emphatically
said on p. 119 that this determination characterizes psychic phenomena adequately.
‘Inner consciousness’ is here merely another expression for inner perception.
3 Up to the positive mark of physical phenomena given in 2 above. I hope, further,
to have achieved accuracy in restating the main points of view which have been
governing factors in the doctrines of the thinkers I value so highly.
4 Locke’s Essay, . i. 19. Locke is not perfectly consistent in so far as he expressly
makes ‘perception’ an apprehension of ideas, and yet makes the apprehension of
the ideas of mental activities depend on special acts of reﬂection, that only at
times supervene on these activities. This is obviously due to the wretched dual
concept ‘idea’ which promiscuously covers the presentations of contents that may
be experienced, and also the experienced contents themselves. See our Inv. , §10.
5 Criticism, as it strikes me, generally stops at the ﬁrst provisional theses of Brentano
– psychology as a science of psychic phenomena, natural science of physical
phenomena – without thinking of the ‘tacit limitations’ which Brentano himself
expounded with characteristic clarity and acuteness. I have been all the more
happy, therefore, to recall them by the full citations given above.
6 Brentano understands by ‘sensations’ acts of sensing, and opposes them to sensed
contents. In our mode of speech, as expounded above, no such distinction obtains. We call ‘sensations’ the mere fact that a sense-content and, further, that a
non-act in general, is present in the experiential complex. In relation to appearing,
talk of ‘sensing’ only serves to point to the apperceptive function of such contents (that they function as bearers of an interpretation, in which the appearance
in question is carried out perceptually or imaginatively).
7 Cf. Brentano, loc. cit. §7, p. 120. In detailed examples he says: ‘Knowledge, joy,
desire, exist actually, colour, tone, warmth only phenomenally and intentionally.’
On p. 104 he lists as examples of physical phenomena: ‘A ﬁgure, landscape that I
see . . . warmth, cold, smell that I sense.’

Index 417

Index

a fortiori 27
a priori 13, 14, 44, 52, 61, 62, 68, 71,
75, 76, 77, 80, 86, 91, 93, 97, 119,
127, 128, 150, 178–80, 196, 235, 240,
243, 262, 276, 293, 345, 356, 368,
399; analytic/synthetic laws 19,
172–3; laws 169, 183, 189–92, 194;
proof 174; truth 186
abstract 169, 179, 180, 207, 247
abstraction 133, 140, 142, 147–9, 153,
154, 178, 357–8, 363–4
absurdity 57, 192–3, 309, 334
act-character 133, 199, 213, 219, 220, 222,
233–6, 247, 257, 291, 292, 352, 353
act-quality 236, 243, 249, 274
acts 76, 113, 115–16, 121, 135, 151, 188,
200, 209, 213, 214, 217–18, 221,
223–9, 232–6, 246–7, 249–50, 260,
273, 308–9, 353, 354–7, 363, 366,
379, 388, 400, 404
adequate, adequation 324–6, 329,
331–4, 340, 357–8, 359, 367, 370–2,
375, 381–3, 402, 403
adjectival presentation 195
aesthetic intention 213
afﬁrmation 31, 127, 260
agreement 311, 380
allness 139
ambiguity 91, 103, 122, 147, 251,
261–4, 287, 399, 400, 401, 403–4
analytic: laws 19–21; propositions 172
anthropologism 83–90; critique 47–50
apodictic 54, 68, 190, 192, 246
appearance 203–4, 397–9
apperception 220, 222, 322
Aristotle 16, 381, 383, 384
arithmetic 74, 81, 96, 364
articulated objects 165

assertion 51, 112–13, 136, 148, 194,
251, 253, 312, 330–1, 358, 390
association 111, 170
attention 147–9, 220; deﬁciencies 153–5;
unitary 155–7
attributes, attribution 151–3, 154, 341
authentic 76, 276, 369–71, 373, 380;
thinking 365–8
awareness (Bewusstheit) 208–10
bad 25–6
being, non-being 17, 143–4, 156, 333–4,
346–8, 359
belief 104, 244, 257, 259
Bergmann, H. 22
Berkeley, G. 147, 165–6
Böcklin, A. 404
Bolzano, B. 22, 68–70, 184–5, 381
Brentano, F. 93, 185, 206, 211–15, 219,
224, 227, 243, 244, 253, 395–6, 400,
401, 404
bundle theory 218
categorematic expressions 185, 188
categorial: acts 275–6, 354–7, 360–1,
363; form 76, 79–80, 94, 116, 235,
275, 339–44, 348–9, 364–5, 367, 368,
374; ideas 195; intuition 348–9, 349,
367; laws 365–8; meaning 369;
objective correlates 345–6; perception
349–51; predicate 232–3; structures
196; unity 177–8
categories 78–9, 128, 133, 170, 196,
346–8, 363–4; formal-logical 172;
semantic 190
causality 37
causation 171, 225–6
circles of similars 139–40

418 Index
class-concept 295
classiﬁcation 45, 140, 291–2, 295
cognition 88
coincidence 289, 298, 307
communication 93, 105, 106–7, 108–10,
383–8
compatibility 193, 369, 372
completeness 324–6, 329
complexity 111, 232–3, 244–5; deﬁned
164; of expressions 184–6; of
meaning 184–6
concepts 16, 51, 76, 78–9, 88–9, 95,
126, 149, 195, 262, 263, 265, 274,
347, 363–4
concrete 203, 207; acts 188, 262; whole
354
conditions 63
conﬂict 300–1, 311
connection 45, 65, 78; apodeictic 54
consciousness 46, 97, 141, 143, 148,
151, 153, 200, 206–8, 215, 217–18,
220–1, 222–3, 239–40, 243, 248, 249,
251, 264, 296–8, 366, 372, 395–6,
399; experience 202–5; inner 205–6;
varied ambiguity of term 201–2
consequence 56
constitution 49–50
content 56–9, 116–17, 150, 153, 156,
165–7, 200, 201, 204–5, 210, 220–1,
223, 265–6, 315–16, 324, 368, 400–1;
inseparable 166–7; knowledge 75
contingency 31, 32, 51, 73
contradiction 47–8, 50
deduction 80
deﬁnite article 125–6
demonstratives 124–5
Descartes, R. 391, 393
description 169, 229–30
descriptive, psychology 95–6
desire 228
determination 287
disciplines 26–9, 35
disjunctiva 379
dispersed multiplicity 138–40
economy of thought 158–9
ego 202, 204–5, 208, 215, 217–18, 239,
257, 396, 399
Ehrenfels, C. von 168, 266
emotion 213
empiricism 42, 45, 64, 86, 139–40, 147

epistemology 14, 16, 38–9, 64, 67, 89,
148–9, 208, 246, 360
equivocation 122
error 146, 147, 151
essence 54, 74, 76, 79, 126–7, 140, 148,
213, 236–8, 243, 244–5, 251, 273–4,
324
essentially occasional expressions 122–6
ethics 26, 246
events 202
evidence 19, 97, 99
existence 173, 194, 230, 257
experience 41–2, 62, 74, 86, 88, 97, 148,
154, 166, 202–4, 209, 218, 219–23,
246, 291, 347, 385–6, 389, 398, 402;
consciousness/content relation 204–5
explanation 38, 50, 74, 140
expression 92–3, 104–5, 112, 116,
133, 184, 186–7, 281–5, 309, 340,
342, 369, 373, 379, 380, 381–2,
386, 389–90; acts 282–5; in
communication 106–7; complex
184–6; as ideal unity 112–13;
objective correlate of 114–15; percept
285–6; phenomenological/intentional
distinctions 105–6; in solitary life
107–8; unity 296–8
extension 149–51, 167–8, 169
external, perception 212, 391–5, 396–7,
398, 401; relations 356
facts 40, 42–3, 49, 51, 399
falsehood 31, 33, 39, 48–9, 51, 53, 136,
334, 385, 390
feeling 224–6; sensations/acts
distinction 226–9
ﬁelds 12–13
ﬁxation of aims 145–7
form 149–51, 165, 168, 193–6, 340, 362,
363–4, 364–5; of theory 80
formality 173, 178–80, 183
formulae 46
foundation 176–8, 179; concept 174–6
founded, acts 232–3, 354–7, 360;
contents 187–9; object 365
fragmentation 179
Frege, G. 118
frustration 300–1, 303, 334
fulﬁlment 99, 116–17, 140, 149, 199,
274, 285, 288, 299–300, 302–4, 307,
312–15, 327–30, 331, 339–41, 346–8,
360, 363, 369, 380

Index 419
fullness 315–16, 319–21, 327, 380;
gradations 315–19
general, concepts 158–9
generality 40, 42, 89, 151, 152; of ideas
147–9; as meaning-form 149–51; of
psychological function 149–51; of
words 292–6
geometry 15, 74, 96
good 25–6
grammar 92–3, 183, 185–6, 381–3
ground 56, 74, 79
grounded judgement 284
grounded knowledge 73
Hamilton, Sir William 12, 30
Herbart, J. 32
Höﬂer, A. 60
Hume, D. 128, 147, 240, 264
hypostatization 142–4
hypothetical predication 232–3
Idea (ideation) 136, 147, 214, 220, 223,
229, 246, 347, 374; categorial 195;
formal logic 68; general 147–9; of
Knowledge 75; of Normative
Discipline 26; of Science 20; of
Subjectivity 75; of Theory 77
ideal 199, 229, 332
ideal unity 138–40
idealism 134
ideality 38, 44–5, 57–8, 62, 63–6, 76
identity 137–8, 221, 237, 296–8, 304,
312–14, 353
illusion 247
image 238–41, 304–6
image-contents 135
imagination 76, 258–60, 262, 263–4,
292, 306–8, 310, 315–19, 327, 348–9
immanence 238–41, 257, 399;
characters 221; objectivity 215–17
incompatibility 193
independent meaning 186–7
indication 103–4
individual objects 135–6
individuality 152
inference 127–8
inner: evidence 17–18, 50, 51, 59–60,
62, 63, 64–6, 75; experience 245;
perception 205–6, 212, 245–6, 391–2,
393, 395–7, 401, 403; sense 346
inseparability 166–7; examples 167–9

insight 42, 91, 96, 196, 202
intention 25, 109, 150, 236–8, 251, 260,
274, 299–300, 310, 312
intentional 224; characters 221, 243;
content 229–32; essence 236–8,
244–5, 251, 273–4; experience 209,
218, 219–20; feelings 224–9;
inexistence 265; objects 212–17,
218–19, 230–2
interconnections 71
interpretation 135, 166, 220, 222, 291,
322–3, 340, 355, 399
intimation 107, 109–10, 112, 121–2
intuition 42, 50, 88, 90, 94, 109, 110,
113, 139, 142, 146, 154, 155–7,
158–9, 223, 245, 262, 274–5, 289,
290, 291–2, 299–300, 304–5, 312,
314–15, 315–16, 315–19, 322–3,
324–6, 329, 340, 342–3, 347, 348–9,
360, 365, 366, 370, 374–6, 379, 380,
389, 400; complete/mutilated 324–6;
universal 357–9
intuitive representation 79
is-ought 54
Jäsche, G. B. 31
judgements 12–13, 17, 19, 32, 33, 37,
44, 47, 49–50, 54–5, 56, 59–66, 62,
65, 72, 86, 87, 94, 112, 126, 127, 145,
150, 155, 185, 213, 231, 233, 237,
239, 244–5, 249–50, 251, 253,
259–60, 282, 283, 284, 336, 342,
346–8, 369–70, 380, 382–3, 384–5,
388–90, 401; normative 24–5;
universal 137
justiﬁcation 44
Kant, I. 13, 14, 26, 31–2, 173, 240, 375,
376
knowing 18, 294, 295, 302–4, 379
knowledge 16–19, 21–2, 28, 33, 37, 40,
42, 44, 53–5, 72, 75, 76–7, 86, 95,
98–9, 140, 312–13, 314, 324, 341,
343, 365, 376, 388
Lange, F. A. 68
language 85–6, 185–6
laws 23–4, 31, 32–4, 46, 48, 50, 53–5,
60, 75, 77, 158–9, 188, 370, 371–3,
399; basic 73; categorial 365–8; of
complication 78; compounding of
meanings 193–6; empirical 40; exact

420 Index
40; factual 40; genuine 40; governing
combinations of meanings 189–92;
ideal 78; knowledge of 42; material/
formal distinction 170–1; multiplicity
169–70; natural 36–8, 49; pure 39,
40–1, 42; of thought 36–8, 365–71
likeness 137–8, 139, 305–6, 308
Lipps, T. 30
Locke, J. 142, 147–9, 158, 264, 346,
391, 392, 396
logic 30, 33–4, 55–6, 59–60, 126–7,
183, 264, 373–4; deﬁnitions 11, 21–2;
demarcation 13–14; formal 14, 68
logico-grammatical: forms 193–6; laws
255, 370, 371–3
manifolds 80–1, 87, 125, 223, 364
many-rayed acts 254
material: acts 252–5; forms 191
mathematics 15–16, 56–9, 61–2, 69, 96,
125, 364
matter 233–6, 242–3, 247, 248, 251–2,
257, 259, 261, 265, 274, 312, 340,
344; fullness/intentional 319–21;
interpretative 322–3; as presentation
243–5
meaning simpliciter 116–17
meaning-content 90
meaning-fulﬁlment 87, 109–10, 112,
113, 116–17, 274, 281–2
meaning-intention 87, 109, 110–11, 112,
116, 120, 129, 190, 199, 264, 274,
281–2, 297, 303, 341, 344
meaninglessness 117–20, 118
meaning(s) 79, 87–8, 90, 92, 94, 97,
105–6, 115–16, 116, 122, 136, 137,
146, 183, 274, 286–91, 298, 308–11,
340–1, 369, 370–1, 372, 379, 390;
combinations 189–92, 193; complex
184–6; compounding 193–6;
equivocations 117–20; ideal 126–9;
independent/non-independent 186–7;
occasional 122–6; simple 184
Meinong, A. von 60, 168
memory 221, 262
mental: acts 200, 201, 211; phenomena
36, 55–6, 57–8, 63, 89, 90, 105,
212–14, 372
metaphysical hypostatization 142–3
metaphysics 16, 45–6, 99, 223
method 20–1
Mill, J. S. 11, 30, 55, 59, 85, 146, 148,
149, 152, 253

mind 36
modiﬁcation 252–3, 255; imaginative
258–60; qualitative 255–60
moment(s) 164, 172, 186, 247, 345–6,
354, 389; non-independent 179–80;
qualitative 167–8; of unity 168–9;
variable 167
morality 26
mutilated intuitions 324–6
names 114–15, 121–2, 136, 145, 193,
282, 388; general 147–8; positing/
non-positing 255
Natorp, P. 208, 209, 210, 223
natural science 220, 394
nature 36–8
necessity 56
negation 31
noetic 45, 46, 75, 88
nominal, acts 252, 254, 261;
presentation 195
nominalism 142–3; critique 151;
objections to 145–7; origin of
modern 147–9
nomology 77, 126
non-acts 223–9
non-independence: laws governing 169,
171; meanings 186–7, 187–9;
moments 179–80, 186, 189
non-objectifying acts 381–3, 389
nonsense 48, 192–3, 373, 382
normativity 16, 17, 19, 20–1, 34–5,
38, 53–5, 74; concept 23–7;
disciplines/technologies 26;
foundation 27–9
object-directedness 94
objectifying acts 251–60, 260, 261,
302–4, 343–4
objective: analysis 141; categories 78;
conditions 45, 46; correlate 114–15,
119; expression 122–6; reference
115–16; validity 79
objectivity 65, 72, 89, 98, 122, 183
objects 89, 135–6, 153, 156, 239–41,
291–2, 298, 345, 388–9
opposition 65, 134
ought/is 33
particularity 31
part(s) 164–5, 354, 355–7, 365–6,
366; formal 178–80; independent/
non-independent distinction 165–6

Index 421
perception 65, 91, 96, 107, 117, 202–3,
212, 220, 221, 237–8, 245–8, 263–4,
284, 285–91, 306–8, 310, 315–19,
327–30, 340, 341, 343–4, 345,
348–54, 358, 366, 391–7, 400,
401–2
personal pronoun 123–4
phenomena 214, 393–4, 403–4
phenomenological analysis 141
phenomenology 79, 85–8, 96–7, 98–9,
110–11, 148, 153, 229–30, 293, 296,
399; analytic 88–92
philosophy 158–60
picturing 263, 292
pieces 165, 179–80
positing, non-positing 255, 260
possibility 56, 76–7, 77, 139, 140, 171,
294, 327, 359, 366–7, 374, 399
predication 139, 145, 147, 150, 341; acts
282; form 387
prejudices 53–5; content 56–9;
judgement 59–66; knowledge 53–5
presentations 91, 94, 97, 142, 146, 149,
156, 185, 195, 213, 214, 216, 221–2,
230–1, 237, 243–5, 251, 252, 253,
259, 328, 386; ambiguity 249–50,
261–4; content 265–6; objectifying
255–8; perceptual 245–8
presupposition 34, 42, 97–9, 127
principles 36
probability 36, 56
projection 328
proof 36, 41, 51, 56, 58, 73, 127
proper names 145, 152, 254, 288–9,
295–6
properties 203
propositions 11, 16, 19, 20–1, 27–8,
40, 46, 53–5, 81, 99, 127, 150, 171,
194, 253, 282, 327, 346; analytic/
synthetic 172–3; normative 23–7;
transformation of 60–3
pseudo-problems 151
pseudo-theories 151
psychical phenomena 185, 208, 211–15,
394–5, 397, 401, 402–3, 404
psychological hypostatization 142–4
psychologism 11, 14, 30, 89, 246;
consequences 36–41; gap in proof
34–5; like relativism 51–2; line of
proof 31; opposition to 31–4;
prejudices 53–66
psychology 11, 14, 46, 63, 86, 90, 95,
153, 220, 266, 392, 403

pure logic 14, 31, 35, 42, 58–9, 61, 67,
85–6, 95, 126–9, 133, 193–6, 364;
ideal conditions 75; interconnections
71–2; knowledge content 76–7; tasks
78–81; unity of theory 73–4
quality 167–8, 169, 233–6, 238, 242–3,
247, 251, 258–60, 274, 327, 334–5,
393; of acts 252–60
rationality 36–8
real (realen, reelle) 229–30, 241, 265,
345–6, 354, 356, 398, 400
realism 143
reality 38, 63–6, 76, 91, 97, 143
recognition 291–6, 293–4, 295, 296,
302–4, 309–10
reﬂection 90, 92, 113, 347
relations 172, 215, 333
relativism: critique 47–52; extended
sense 51; individual 47; like
psychologism 51–2; speciﬁc
46–50
representation 249–50, 261, 310,
315, 322–3
Riehl, A. 56
rules 31, 34
scepticism 17, 36; metaphysical sense
45–6; strict concept 44–5
Schleiermacher, F. 22
Schlick, M. 269
Schopenhauer, A. 27, 398
science 68, 72, 89, 126; aims 12; ﬁelds
12–13; logic as 16–19; theory of
16–20, 21–3
science of science (Wissenschaftslehre)
16–20, 22
second-order concepts 78
self-evidence 44, 46, 47, 50, 54, 60, 62,
87–8, 91, 94, 128, 135, 140, 145–6,
150, 151, 166, 190, 199, 205, 206–7,
314, 329–35, 342, 345
self-fulﬁlment 199
self-identical 137
self-perception 210
self-presentation 304–6
semantics 190–1, 236–8
sensations 91, 220–1, 222, 226–9,
265–6, 316, 398–400
sense 117–18, 148, 149–51, 155, 222,
343–4, 363–4
sense-contents 135, 400

422 Index
sense-perception 330, 346–8, 349–54, 391
senseless 373–4
sensible forms 348–9
sensory quality 186–7
sensuous: acts 275–6; categories 276;
concepts 276; content 401; perception
349–54
shall-should 24–5, 54
signiﬁcation 274, 365, 368–71, 375, 380,
389
sign(s) 103, 104–5, 110, 146, 149, 240,
304–6, 308–11, 315–19, 322–3, 324,
328
Sigwart, C. 33, 38, 55, 59, 382
simplicity 164, 232–3
single-rayed acts 254
singulars 136–7, 139, 151
space 126
species 133, 134, 135, 137–8, 139, 141,
150–1, 152, 154, 169–70, 213, 220,
229, 364, 372; external to thought
142; as objects 136–7, 139–40; in
thought 142; unity of 137–8
speciﬁc unity 146
states of affairs 331, 333, 348, 349, 370,
385, 390
straightforward acts 351–4, 360
Stumpf, C. 166, 167–8
subjective conditions 44–5, 46
subjectivity 46–8, 74, 75
substance 315–19
substitution 196
syllogism 15, 39, 56, 77, 81, 126
symbolic, meaning 146
syncategorematic expression 184–6,
188, 189
synthesis 356–7, 380; propositions 171,
173
systematic unity 20
technology 20–1, 27, 60
temporality 297
theoretical disciplines 27–9
theory 23–4, 30, 44–5, 76–7, 78, 87,
126, 153; forms 80–1; general 74–5
thing 46, 53, 143, 156
thing in general 152

thinking 21, 31, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 60,
155–7, 365–8, 369, 373, 374–6
thought 21, 31, 36–8, 54, 59, 78, 86, 97,
128, 148, 274, 291–2, 343, 360,
368–71
thought-acts 155–6
thought-content 140, 143
time 126, 207
transcendence 240
Trendelenburg, A. 12
triangles 149
truth(s) 17, 18, 19, 31, 33, 35, 42–3,
46–7, 48–50, 51, 54, 56, 61, 63, 69,
113, 151, 183, 186, 331–5, 385, 390;
general 73, 74; individual 73;
interconnection 71–2
unconscious 152
underlying acts 232–3
understanding 32, 39, 371–2
unity 45, 87, 122, 128, 168–9, 223, 303,
322, 346, 347, 355, 365–8; of acts
110–11; categorial 177–8; of
expression 296–8; ideal 112–13; of
objects 364; of science 71–2, 73–4,
74; spurious 137–8
unity-for-thought 147
universal(s) 31, 41, 81, 136–7, 149–51;
object 135–7, 147, 265, 329, 358;
presentation 147; psychological
hypostatization of 142–4
validation 18–19, 47, 60, 65, 79, 97,
128, 143, 374; isolated 19; of
meaning 370–1
value-predicates 25
veriﬁcation 330–1, 333
vérités de raison/vérités de fait 64
whole 164, 168, 176–7, 355–7, 366;
concrete 203, 207; formal 178–80;
founded 177–8
wish-fulﬁlment 302–3
wish-sentence 185, 383
wish-utterances 122
wishes 283, 385–6
Wundt, W. 38, 60, 202

